Edexcel Economics (A) A-level
Theme 4: A Global Perspective
   4.4 The Financial Sector
               Detailed Notes




       www.pmt.education
                      4.4.1 Role of financial markets
Financial markets are ​where buyers and sellers can buy and trade a range of services
or assets that are fundamentally monetary in nature.

They exist for two main reasons: to meet the ​demand for services​, such as saving and
borrowing, from individuals, businesses and the government and ​to allow speculation and
financial gains​.




Role of the financial market

   ●   One role of the financial market is to ​facilitate savings​, which allows people to
       transfer their spending power from the present to the future. It can be done through a
       range of assets, such as storing money in savings account and holding stocks and
       shares.

   ●   On top of this, they ​lend to businesses and individuals which allows consumption
       and investment. They are sometimes referred to as a financial intermediary, the step
       between taking money from one person to give to another since money from savings
       is used for investment.

   ●   Also, they ​facilitate the exchange of goods and service​s by creating a payment
       system. Central banks print paper money, institutions process cheque transactions,
       companies offer credit card services and banks and bureau de changes buy and sell
       foreign currencies.

   ●   Similarly, they ​provide forward markets​. This is where firms are able to buy and sell
       in the future at a set price, for example if a farmer wants to sell the crop they are




                           www.pmt.education
       growing at a guaranteed price in a month’s time. The forward market exists for
       commodities and in foreign exchange and helps to provide stability.

   ●   On top of this, they provide a ​market for equities​, company’s shares. Issuing shares
       is an important way for companies to finance expansion but people would be unlikely
       to buy shares if they were unable to sell them on in the future. Financial markets
       provide the ability for shares to be sold on in the future, making the asset more
       appealing.




              4.4.2 Market failure in the financial sector
The combination of speculation and provision of genuine services means that financial
markets are prone to regular crises that cause significant damage to the real economy.

Asymmetric information:

One problem with the financial sector is that financial institutions often have ​more
knowledge compared to their customers​, both consumers and other institutions. This
means they can sell them products that they do not need, are cheaper elsewhere or are
riskier than the buyer realises. ​The Global Financial Crisis was partially caused by banks
selling packages of prime and subprime mortgages, but advertising them as all prime
mortgages​. Those buying these packages suffered from asymmetric information and it is
unlikely they would have bought them if they knew the risk involved. Additionally, there can
be asymmetric information between ​financial institutions and regulators​. The institutions
have little incentive to help regulators understand their business and this causes difficulties
for the regulators so may allow institutions to undertake harmful activities.

Externalities:

There are a number of costs placed on firms, individuals and the government that ​the
financial market does not pay​. One example of this is the cost to the taxpayer ​of bailing
out the banks after the 2007-8 financial crisis​. Even higher than this, was ​the long-term cost
to the economy of the crisis due to its effects on demand and growth. Moral hazard also
shows some external costs.




                            www.pmt.education
Moral hazard:

This is where individuals ​make decisions in their own best interests knowing there are
potential risks​. This can happen in two main ways in the financial markets. Firstly, it will
occur where individual workers take ​adverse risk in order to increase their salary​. Any
problems they cause will be the problem of the company and not the problem of the
individual, the worst that can happen is to lose their job whilst the company may lose millions
of pounds. ​The Global Financial Crisis was caused by moral hazard, when employees sold
mortgages to those who would not be unable to pay them back. By selling more mortgages,
they would see higher salaries and bonuses but would not see the negative effects if the
loan was not repaid. On top of this, financial institutions may take excessive risk because
they know the ​central bank is the lender of last resort and so will not allow them to fail
because of the impact it would have on the economy.

Speculation and market bubbles:

Almost all trading in financial markets is speculative and this leads to the ​creation of market
bubbles​, where the price of a particular assets rises massively and then falls. They tend to
occur because investors see the price of an asset is rising and so decide to purchase this
asset as they believe the price will continue to rise and will profit them in the future. This
leads to prices becoming excessively high and eventually enough investors decide that the
price will fall, so they sell their assets and panic sets in, causing mass selling. This is known
as ​herding behaviour​. Moreover, the financial market has also caused market bubbles in
the ​housing market by lending too much in mortgages and increasing demand for houses.
When this bubble bursts, for example due to a rise in real interest rates, there is a fall in
demand for houses and a negative wealth effect, reducing AD, and banks are left with loans
that will not be repaid in full. Other bubbles included the ​dot com bubble in the 1990s and the
Wall Street Crash in 1929.

Market rigging:

This is where a group of individuals or institutions ​collude to fix prices or exchange
information that will lead to gains for themselves at the expense of other participants in
the market. One example of this is ​insider trading​, where an individual or institution has
knowledge about something that will happen in the future that others do not know and so
can buy or sell shares to make a profit. Another example is where ​individuals or
institutions affect the price of a commodity, currency or asset to benefit themselves, for
example large trades in a currency will shift its value and this will make a difference to
individuals selling or buying assets with that currency. ​In the Libor scandal of 2008, financial
institutions were accused of fixing the London Interbank Lending Rate (LIBOR), one of the
most important rates in the world.




                            www.pmt.education
                           4.4.3 Role of central banks
Role of the central bank

   ●   Firstly, the central bank ​controls monetary policy through interest rates and
       controlling money supply in order to keep inflation low and stable.

   ●   It acts as a ​banker to the government​. The exact nature of the services offered by
       the bank differs from country to country, for example the Bank of England was
       previously responsible for managing the national debt but this role was transferred to
       the Debt Management Office in 1998. They often hold the government's bank
       account and lend to them, holding government debt, as well as holding gold and
       foreign exchange reserves.

   ●   Similarly, they act as a ​bank to other banks​. Banks deposit their money within the
       central bank and this is often used to balance the accounts of banks at the end of
       each day, when banks owe each other money because cheques have been paid in
       by consumers etc. The most important part of this role is the fact they are a lender of
       last resort. If banks experience liquidity problems, they can turn to the central bank to
       sell their illiquid assets or to take a loan in the short term. If the bank is on the brink of
       collapse as its assets have fallen too far in value e.g. the financial crisis of 2007-8,
       then the bank can lend them money to prevent them from collapsing. Banks tend to
       lend to each other and so the collapse of one bank will lead to the collapse of other
       banks; this means that this role is important since as it allows the bank to ensure
       financial stability.

   ●   Moreover, central banks in some countries ​regulate the financial system​. This is
       important to prevent financial institutions from undertaking activities which harm
       consumers or engage in risky activities which would lead to collapse and to prevent
       systemic risk, the risk of the whole system collapsing. The financial sector plays a
       huge role in the economy because it impacts investment and can cause huge
       externalities if market failure occurs.

Financial regulation:

   ●   Regulation can include: banning market rigging; preventing the sale of unsuitable
       products; maximum interest rates to prevent consumer exploitation and prevent
       excessively risky lending; deposit insurance to protect consumer deposits and
       increase stability; and liquidity ratios, when banks are forced to hold a certain
       percentage of liquid assets.

   ●   There are three key bodies for financial regulation:
          o The FPC identifies and reduces system risk and supports government
              economic policy (macroprudential)




                             www.pmt.education
o   The PRA ensures competition, ensures consumers have access to services,
    minimises risk should a bank fail and ensures banks take responsible action.
    (microprudential)
o   The FCA protects consumers, promotes competition and enhances the
    integrity of the system by preventing market rigging.




                www.pmt.education
