 Edexcel Economics (A) A-level
Theme 1: Introduction to Markets
              and
        Market Failure
          1.2 How Markets Work
                            Detailed Notes




               https://bit.ly/pmt-edu-cc
  This work by PMT                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                        Education is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND      4.0


                                                                            https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                  https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                    https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                      1.2.1 Rational decision making

The underlying assumptions of rational economic decision making:

   ●   Consumers aim to maximise utility: Utility is the satisfaction gained from
       consuming a product. The rational consumer is called Homo Economicus, who
       makes decisions by calculating the utility gained from each decision and chooses the
       one which will give them the most satisfaction.

   ●   Firms aim to maximise profit: Economic theory assumes that firms are run for their
       owners and shareholders and so aim to maximise profit in order to keep the
       shareholders happy.

   ●   Governments aim to maximise social welfare: Governments are voted in by the
       public and work for the public, so should aim to maximise their satisfaction by taking
       decisions which increase social welfare.

This is the basis for economic thinking, but it is currently being questioned by behavioral
economists. Economic agents do not always have the information necessary to act rationally
and consumers do not always make calculated decisions.




                                      1.2.2 Demand
Demand is the ability and willingness to buy a particular good at a given price and at a given
moment in time.

Movements and shifts of the demand curve:

   ●   A movement along the demand curve, for example from A to B, is caused by a
       change in the price of the good. A shift of the demand curve, for example D1 to D2,
       is caused by a change in any of the factors which affect demand, the conditions of
       demand.

   ●   A movement from A to B is a contraction in demand, the quantity demanded falls
       because of an increase in price. A movement from A to C is an extension in
       demand, the quantity demanded rises due to a decrease in price. Movements along
       the curve are not called increases or decreases- this only occurs when the curve
       shifts.

   ●   A shift from D1 to D2 is a decrease in demand, because fewer goods are demanded
       at each and every price. For example, at price P only Q2 goods are demanded rather
       than Q1 goods. A shift from D1 to D3 is an increase in demand, as more goods are
       demanded at each and every price. Now, Q3 goods are demanded at price P.




                                                                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
The conditions of demand:

The conditions of demand are the factors which cause the demand curve to shift. A shift to
the right is an increase in demand and a shift to the left is a decrease in demand. One way
to remember this is the mnemonic PIRATES.

   ●   Population: If population rises, we would expect demand for all products to increase
       and so the demand curve will shift to the right. This is because the more people there
       are in the country, the more people who will want a good.

   ●   Income: For most goods, if income increases, demand increases because a person
       can afford to buy more of the product. If there is a fall in income then the demand
       would decrease and shift to the left. However, for some goods an increase in income
       can lead to a fall in demand and vice versa, this is a concept called income elasticity
       of demand.

   ●   Related goods: If goods are complements or substitutes of each other then a
       change in the price of another good can cause a shift in the demand curve.
       Substitutes are where you either buy one good or the other, for example you either
       buy a pair of Nike trainers or a pair of Adidas trainers. An increase in the price of
       Nike trainers would lead to a contraction in demand for Nike trainers and an increase
       in demand of Adidas trainers, as we would expect people to buy them instead.
       Complements are goods such as DVDs and DVD players where if you have one, you
       need the other to go with it. If the price of DVD players drops, demand for DVD
       players would extend and we would expect the demand curve for DVDs to increase.
       This is linked to the concept of cross elasticity of demand.




                                                                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
  ●   Advertising: If a firm carries out a successful advertising campaign, demand is likely
      to increase. If a competitor firm carries out a successful advertising campaign,
      demand for the first firm will fall. A successful advertising campaign by Tesco will
      increase demand for Tesco but reduce demand for Asda.

  ●   Taste/fashion: If something becomes more fashionable, we expect demand to
      increase and if it becomes less fashionable, then demand will fall.

  ●   Expectations: Expectations of what might happen in the future can have a big
      impact on the level of demand for some goods. If people expect a shortage of
      something, or that price will rise in the future, then demand for that product will
      increase. If people expect that price will fall in the future, demand will decrease.

  ●   Seasons: Some products will find their demand affected by the weather. For
      example, hot summers cause an increase in demand for sun cream whilst wet
      summers cause a decrease in demand for umbrellas.

  ●   Government legislation can also have an effect on the demand for goods. Demand
      for car seats increased after the government made it a legal requirement that young
      children have to sit in them.



Diminishing marginal utility:

  ●   The demand curve slopes downward, showing the inverse relationship between
      price and quantity. This can be explained by the law of diminishing marginal utility.

  ●   In order to explain or predict how people will spend their money, we have to assume
      that they are going to behave rationally, expecting them to spend it according to
      what gives them the greatest level of satisfaction or welfare.

  ●   Total utility represents the satisfaction gained by a customer as a result of their
      overall consumption of a good e.g. the satisfaction of eating the whole bar of
      chocolate, whilst marginal utility represents the change in satisfaction resulting from
      the consumption of the next unit of a good e.g. the increased satisfaction by eating
      another bite of chocolate.

  ●   The Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility states that the satisfaction derived from
      the consumption of an additional unit of a good will decrease as more of a
      good is consumed, assuming the consumption of all other goods remains constant.

  ●   This explains why the demand curve slopes downwards: if more of a good is
      consumed, there is less satisfaction derived from the good. This means that
      consumers are less willing to pay high prices at high quantities since they are
      gaining less satisfaction.




                                                                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                          https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
       1.2.3 Price, income and cross elasticities of demand
Elasticity of demand is an attempt to measure the responsiveness of quantity demanded to
changes in other variables: its own price, the price of other goods and real income. If a good
is elastic, it is relatively responsive and if it is inelastic, it is relatively unresponsive

Price elasticity of demand (PED):

This is the responsiveness of demand to a change in the price of the good.

%change in quantity demanded
     %change in price

e.g. If the original price was £5 and 100 were sold and the new price is £3 and 120 are
sold, what is the PED?
%change in quantity demanded: (20/100)x100=20%
%change in price: (-2/5)x100=-40%
PED= 20%/-40%= -½

Numerical values:

Most values of PED are negative, since a rise in price leads to a fall in output. Therefore, we
look at the integer alone, disregarding the negative sign.

   ●    Unitary elastic PED is where PED=1: quantity demanded changes by exactly the
        same percentage as price. This would be shown as a reciprocal curve.
   ●    Relatively elastic PED is where PED>1: quantity demanded changes by a larger
        percentage than price so demand is relatively responsive to price. The curve will be
        more sloping.
   ●    Relatively inelastic PED is where PED<1: quantity demanded changes by a smaller
        percentage than price so demand is relatively unresponsive to price. The curve will
        be steep.
   ●    Perfectly elastic PED is where PED=infinity: a change in price means that quantity
        falls to 0 and demand is very responsive to price. This would be shown by a
        horizontal line
   ●    Perfectly inelastic PED is where PED=0: a change in price has no effect on output
        so demand is completely unresponsive to price. This would be shown by a vertical
        line.




                                                                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                            https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
Factors influencing PED:

   ●   Availability of substitutes: If a product has lots of substitutes (for example instead
       of buying Coke you could buy Pepsi), people will switch to other products when
       prices go up. Therefore, PED will be elastic. If there are no substitutes, then the
       demand curve will be inelastic since even if prices go up, people will have to buy that
       good if they want it as there are no alternatives.

   ●   Time: The longer the time, the easier it will be for a person to find an alternative
       product/supplier of the product so the more elastic the good is. In the short term,
       many goods are inelastic as people may not even notice the price difference.

   ●   Necessity: If you need something, the demand curve will be inelastic because even
       if the price goes up, you still need to buy it.

   ●   How large of a % of total expenditure: If a good/service represents a very small
       percentage of a person’s expenditure, a significant increase in price will have a
       relatively small impact on how much they buy of that product so it will be inelastic e.g.
       matches.

   ●   Addictive: If a product is addictive, then the demand curve will be inelastic. No
       matter how high prices are, people will still buy the good to fulfill their addiction.

Significance of PED:

   ●   The price elasticity of demand, along with the price elasticity of supply, determine the
       effects of the imposition of indirect taxes and subsidies.

   ●   The more elastic the demand curve, the lower the incidence of tax on the consumer.
       This means that when PED is elastic, a tax will only lead to a small increase in price
       and the supplier will have to cover the majority of the cost of the tax.

   ●   When demand is inelastic, the tax will be mainly passed onto the consumer. Since
       consumers are relatively unresponsive to the price of this good, quantity demanded
       will not fall by a large amount. This means that the tax will be ineffective at
       reducing output. However, it also means that there is higher tax revenue for the
       government. The more inelastic the demand curve, the higher the tax revenue for
       the government.

These effects can be seen on the diagrams: the first diagram shows inelastic demand, as
the demand curve is steep. The tax leads to a small fall in output but a large increase in
price, with a large consumer burden. The second diagram shows elastic demand, as the
demand curve is sloping. Output falls significantly and the producer burden is high. These
diagrams also show that revenue generated is higher when demand is inelastic.




                                                                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
   ●   With a subsidy, elastic demand means that the consumer sees a small fall in price
       whilst the producer gains a lot in extra revenue. The more inelastic demand, the
       more the price falls. Elastic demand also means there is a large change in output
       following a subsidy, whilst inelastic demand means that there is little change in
       output. Therefore, subsidies on goods with inelastic demand are ineffective at
       increasing output. They are cheaper for the government to impose since output
       increases by less and so the government have to pay the subsidy on less goods.

These effects can also be seen on the diagram. In the first diagram, demand is inelastic and
there is a small rise in output but a large fall in price, with little producer gain. In the second
diagram, demand is elastic and there is a large rise in output but a small fall in price. They
show that the government has to spend more for subsidies on elastic goods.




                                                                                                      https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                             https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
The shift from S1 to S2 on tax diagrams is a result of the imposition of an indirect tax: this
raises the cost of production and shifts supply to the left. The opposite occurs with a subsidy.
Diagrammatic analysis of indirect taxation and subsidies is looked at in more detail at the
end of this unit.




                                                                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                            https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
PED and revenue:

   ●   For an elastic demand curve: A decrease in price leads to an increase in revenue
       and an increase in price leads to a decrease in revenue.
   ●   For an inelastic demand curve: A decrease in price leads to a decrease in revenue
       and an increase in price leads to an increase in revenue.
   ●   For a unitary elastic curve, a change in price does not affect total revenue.

e.g. PED= -0.5. The firm currently sells 10,000 at a price of £5. What will happen to
total revenue if the price falls to £4?
Original total revenue: 10,000x£5= £50,000
%change in price: (-1/5)x100=-20%
Change in output: -0.5=Q/-20%
        -0.5x20%=Q=10%                          (by rearranging the PED formula)
New output: 10% of 10,000=1000 10,000+1000= 11,000            (using the fact that output
increases by 10%)
New total revenue: 11,000x4=44,000
Difference in revenue: 44,000-50,000 = -6,000.
Revenue will fall by £6,000



Income elasticity of demand (YED):

This is the responsiveness of demand to a change in income.

%change in quantity demanded
   %change in income.

Numerical values:

   ●   An inferior good is when YED<0: a rise in income will lead to a fall in demand for
       the good. For example, Tesco Value goods are inferior goods.
   ●   A normal good is when YED>0: a rise in income will lead to a rise in demand for the
       good.
   ●   A luxury good is a type of normal good, when YED>1.
   ●   Goods can also be as elastic or inelastic in income. If the integer is bigger than
       one, the good is elastic. If the integer is smaller than one, the good is inelastic and
       this tends to be necessities.

Significance of YED:

   ●   It is important for businesses to know how their sales will be affected by changes
       in the income of the population. If the economy is improving and people’s incomes
       are rising it is vital that a business knows whether this is likely to increase their sales
       or not.




                                                                                                     https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                            https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
   ●   It may have an impact on the type of goods that a firm produces. During times of
       prosperity, firms might produce more luxury goods and less inferior goods.



Cross elasticity of demand (XED):
This is the responsiveness of demand for one product (A) to the change in price of another
product (B).

%change in quantity demanded of A
  %change in price of B.

Numerical values:

   ●   Substitutes are where XED>0: an increase in the price of good B will increase
       demand for good A. For example, Coca Cola and Pepsi are substitutes.
   ●   Complementary goods are where XED<0: an increase in the price of good B will
       decrease demand for good A. One example is DVDs and DVD players.
   ●   Unrelated goods are where XED=0: a change in the price of good B has no impact
       on good A.
   ●   The size of the integer represents the strength of the relationship: the larger the
       number, the stronger the relationship between the two.

Significance of XED:

   ●   Firms need to be aware of their competition and those producing complementary
       goods. They need to know how price changes by other firms will impact them so
       they can take appropriate action.



                                         1.2.4 Supply
Supply is the ability and the willingness to provide a good or service at a particular price at a
given moment in time.

Movements and shifts of the supply curve:

   ●   A movement along the supply curve, for example from A to B, is caused by a change
       in the price of the good. A shift of the supply curve, for example S1 to S2, is caused
       by a change in any of the factors which affect supply, the conditions of supply.

   ●   A movement from A to B is a contraction in supply, the quantity supplied falls
       because of a decrease in price. A movement from A to C is an extension in supply,
       the quantity supplied rises due to an increase in price. Movements along the curve
       are not called increases or decreases- this only occurs when the curve shifts.

   ●   A shift from S1 to S2 is a decrease in supply, because fewer goods are supplied at
       each and every price. For example, at price P only Q2 goods are supplied rather than




                                                                                                    https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                            https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
      Q1 goods. A shift from S1 to S3 is an increase in supply, as more goods are
      supplied at each and every price. Now, Q3 goods are supplied at price P.




The conditions of supply:

  ●   Costs of production: If a business has in an increase in their costs but their selling
      price stays the same, they will make less money on what they sell. They will put up
      their prices in order to avoid making a loss and so less is supplied at each price,
      meaning the supply curve will shift to the left. If they have a decrease in their costs,
      then it will shift to the right.

  ●   Price of other goods: Joint supply is where the production of one good
      automatically causes the production of another goods e.g. the production of beef
      automatically produces leather. Therefore, if the price of beef rises, farmers will
      slaughter their cows and so will get more leather, causing a shift to the right and an
      increase in supply. Competitive supply is where the production of one good prevents
      the supply of another e.g. if the farmer kills his cows, he can no longer produce the
      milk. Therefore, the rise in the price of beef may cause a decrease in the supply of
      milk and a shift to the left.

  ●   Weather: For some goods, particularly agricultural goods, the supply is dependent
      on weather e.g. if the weather is good, more wheat will be produced so the curve will
      shift to the right. If the weather is bad, the producers won’t be able to supply as much
      wheat and so it will shift to the left.




                                                                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                          https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
   ●   Technology: If new technology is introduced then it will lead to a fall in production
       costs as there is higher productive efficiency. This will encourage firms to lower
       prices or produce more goods for the same price and so the curve will shift to the
       right. During war or natural disasters, companies may have to use less efficient
       technology so the supply curve will shift to the left as they produce less at each price.

   ●   Goals of the supplier: If a supplier is motivated by helping society and providing a
       service, they may increase supply even when that doesn’t provide extra profit.

   ●   Government legislation: If the government passes laws that mean more cars have
       to have catalytic converters, supply of cars with catalytic converters will increase.
       High levels of regulation may increase costs and so decrease supply.

   ●   Taxes and subsidies: A tax decreases supply and a subsidy increases supply by
       affecting the costs of production.

   ●   Producer cartels: Some firms or countries come together in order to decrease
       supply and therefore increase the price of their good to increase profit.




                           1.2.4 Elasticity of supply
Price elasticity of supply (PES):

This is the responsiveness of supply to a change in price of the good.

%change in quantity supplied
   %change in price




                                                                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
Numerical values:

   ●   Unitary elastic PES is where PES=1: quantity supplied changes by exactly the
       same percentage as price. This would be shown as a curve which starts in the origin,
       is steeper than an elastic curve but more sloping than an inelastic curve.
   ●   Relatively elastic PES is where PES>1: quantity supplied changes by a larger
       percentage than price so supply is relatively responsive to price. The curve will be
       more sloping, starting on the price axis.
   ●   Relatively inelastic PES is where PES<1: quantity supplied changes by a smaller
       percentage than price so supply is relatively unresponsive to price. The curve will be
       steep, starting on the quantity line axis.
   ●   Perfectly elastic PES is where PES=infinity: a change in prices means that quantity
       supplied falls to 0 and supply is very responsive to price. This would be shown by a
       horizontal line.
   ●   Perfectly inelastic PES is where PES=0: a change in price has no effect on output
       so demand is completely unresponsive to price. This would be shown by a vertical
       line.

The diagram shows the curves with different elasticities. S1 shows a unitary elastic supply
curve, S2 shows a relatively elastic supply curve and S3 shows a relatively inelastic supply
curve.




Factors affecting PES:

   ●   Time: This will have an impact on the amount of a good that can be supplied at any
       price. In the immediate term, no matter how high the price is, a supplier can only sell
       the amount of product they have so supply is perfectly inelastic. In economics, the
       short term is the period of time when at least one factor of production is fixed




                                                                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
       and the long term is when all factors of production are variable. In the short term,
       they could sell more products but will still be restricted by the factors of production,
       meaning it will still be relatively inelastic. In the long term, they can increase
       production and all factors are variable and therefore the supply curve will be elastic.
       The longer the period of time the supplier has to make a change and increase
       production, the more elastic the curve will be.

   ●   Stocks: If a business has a stockpile of goods, when the price goes up, they will
       simply decide to use up some or all of their stockpiles and therefore supply will be
       more elastic.

   ●   Working below full capacity: If a business is working below full capacity (e.g. they
       are producing 50 goods but could produce 100) and there is an increase in price,
       they can easily respond by producing to their full capacity so the supply curve will be
       more elastic.

   ●   Availability of factors of production: For example, labour may need particular
       skills or training so cannot be instantly increased. If wages of a doctor rise by a large
       amount, it would still take years before there would be an increase in the number of
       doctors so it is inelastic.

   ●   Ease of entry into the market: Large costs of start-up equipment could make it
       difficult to increase supply, which makes it inelastic. Trade unions or professional
       associations can restrict entry.

   ●   Availability of substitutes: If a good has a lot of producer substitutes, it will have
       high elasticity. One model of car is a substitute for another model of car as producers
       can easily switch between the two meaning suppliers can alter the pattern of
       production if price rises or falls so supply will change.



                           1.2.6 Price determination

Price determination:

The equilibrium point refers to the point at which there are no more forces bringing about
change. Price equilibrium is where supply is equal to demand, so where the demand and
supply curves cross. This price is also known as the market clearing price because all
products supplied to the market are cleared (bought), but no buyers are unable to buy the
good. If the price was higher, there would be unsold goods and if the price was lower, there
would be consumers who would want to buy the good but would be unable to do so.




                                                                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
In this example, the market clearing price is P1 with a quantity of Q1.




Excess demand:

If price is set below equilibrium, then there is excess demand. At the price P2, suppliers are
willing to supply QS but consumers demand QD, meaning there is excess demand of the
orange shaded area.
     ● As a result, there is a shortage in the market. Firms know they can charge higher
         prices and still sell their goods, so this will cause an extension in supply and they will
         now charge P1 for quantity Q1. This higher price will lead to a contraction in demand.
         The prices are now in equilibrium.




                                                                                                      https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                             https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
Excess supply:
If the price is set higher than the equilibrium, then there is excess supply. At price P2,
suppliers are willing to supply QS but consumers only demand QD, meaning there is excess
supply of the orange shaded area. Prices would have to fall.
    ● As a result, firms have unsold goods. This will encourage them to put on sales to sell
       the excess goods, causing prices to fall and supply to contract to P1. As a result,
       demand will extend to P1. The market will now be in equilibrium.




Shifts in demand and supply:
An increase in demand from D1 to D2 will lead to an increase in price from P1 to P2 and an
increase in output from Q1 to Q2. A decrease in demand would decrease price and output




                                                                                               https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                              https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
An increase in supply from S1 to S2 will increase output from Q1 to Q2 and decrease price
from P1 to P2. A decrease in supply would increase price and decrease output.




                            1.2.7 Price mechanism

In a free market economy, the price mechanism allocates resources. Price is determined by
the interactions of demand and supply, which also determines how much is bought and sold
and by whom. Prices rise when buyers want to purchase more than suppliers want to sell,
encouraging suppliers to sell more as they will be able to make a higher profit. Adam Smith
described the ‘invisible hand’ of the market, how the price mechanism is able to set prices.

   ●   The rationing function: The price system is a way of rationing goods because when
       price increases, some people will no longer be able to afford to buy the product and
       others may no longer have the desire the buy the good. The limited resources can be
       rationed and allocated to the people who are able to afford them and those who
       value them most highly.

   ●   The signalling function: The price mechanism acts as a signal where resources
       should be used. When prices rise, producers move resources into the manufacture of
       that product. The change in price indicates to suppliers and consumers that market
       conditions have changed so they should change the quantity bought and sold- when
       price equilibrium moves, output equilibrium moves with it.

   ●   The incentive function: It acts as an incentive for people to work hard. Buyers
       realise that the more money they have, they are able to buy more products. Suppliers




                                                                                               https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                              https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
       realise that if they produce more of the goods, they will make more money. Also, low
       prices act as an incentive for consumers to buy more of a good and high prices act
       as an incentive to suppliers to sell more of a good. The price mechanism encourages
       people to behave a certain way.



The price mechanism in the context of different types of markets,
including local, national and global markets:

   ●   Local: The coronavirus pandemic has disrupted supply chains across the planet, and
       many countries have blocked imports to prevent the spread of the virus. If we take
       the example of British supermarkets, less imports from other countries means there
       are fewer goods on supermarket shelves. As the demand for food is high but the
       supply is low, the price of food rises to ration off the excess demand so that only the
       consumers who value the food most highly buy them. This is an example of the
       rationing function.

   ●   National: The price of housing differs across the UK, from being high in the south and
       low in the north. There are multiple reasons to explain these discrepancies. London,
       not only the capital, is the second largest financial centre in the world, as well as
       home to many tourist attractions. As the population of London is high relative to the
       rest of the UK, house prices will rise through the rationing function, i.e. to ration off
       excess demand and only provide houses to those who value them the most. The
       high house prices in London also offer an incentive for firms to allocate resources to
       the production of more houses, as there is profit to be made in this industry. This is
       an example of the incentive function.

   ●   Global: In 1973 the Organisation for Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)
       proclaimed an oil embargo (i.e. restricted the supply of oil on an insurmountable
       scale), due to geopolitical factors regarding America and the Middle East. This sent
       the price of oil at record-breaking levels across the planet, as oil was an invaluable
       resource to countries. This perfectly exemplifies the rationing function because the
       disequilibrium of supply and demand meant the high prices deterred consumers who
       didn’t value oil highly, which left the market open only to those consumers who did.
       By raising the price of oil, the market once again returned to a state of equilibrium.




                1.2.8 Consumer and producer surplus

Consumer and producer surplus:

Consumer surplus is the difference between the price the consumer is willing to pay and
the price they actually pay, set by the price mechanism. This is illustrated by the orange
triangle in the diagram, ABP1. The demand curve shows the price consumers are willing to




                                                                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
pay, and so the difference between the demand curve and the price shows the consumer
surplus.

Producer surplus is the difference between the price the supplier is willing to produce their
product at and the price they actually produce at, set by the price mechanism. This is
illustrated by the purple triangle in the diagram, P1B0. The supply curve shows the price
suppliers are willing to sell the good for, and so the difference between the supply curve and
the price shows the consumer surplus.




Consumer and producer surpluses show the economic gain from the buying and selling of
the good. Consumer surplus shows the welfare gained by consumers for buying the good.
The total satisfaction consumers receive from buying the good is the total area under the
demand curve: ABQ10. They spend P1BQ10 to gain this satisfaction. Therefore, their net
gain is ABP1, the consumer surplus. Similarly, producer surplus shows the economic gain
for producers by selling the good.

Perfectly elastic demand will mean that there is no consumer surplus, whilst perfectly
inelastic demand will mean that consumer surplus is infinite. The more inelastic demand, the
higher consumer surplus is likely to be. When supply is perfectly elastic, producer surplus is
0 and when it is perfectly inelastic, producer surplus is infinite. The more inelastic supply, the
higher producer surplus is likely to be.




                                                                                                     https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                            https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
Shifts of demand and supply:




A decrease in demand from D1 to D2 will lead to a fall in consumer and producer
surplus, as both price and output decrease. Consumer surplus falls from ABP1 to CDP2
and producer surplus falls from P1B0 to P2D0. An increase in demand would have the
opposite effect and increase consumer and producer surplus.




                                                                                       https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                         https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                        https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
A decrease in supply from S1 to S2 will lead to a fall in consumer and producer surplus .
Consumer surplus falls from ABP1 to ADP2 and producer surplus falls from P1B0 to
P2DC. An increase in supply would have the opposite effect and increase consumer and
producer surplus.




                    1.2.9 Indirect taxes and subsidies
Indirect taxes:

An indirect tax is a tax on expenditure where the person who is ultimately charged the tax
is not the person responsible for paying the sum to the government. The business is
required to pay the tax but the customer is charged instead. There are two types of indirect
tax:

   ●   Ad valorem tax is where the tax payable increases in proportion to the value of the
       good. The tax is a percentage of the cost of the good, for example VAT.
   ●   Specific tax is where an amount is added to the price. The tax increases with the
       amount bought rather than the value of goods. For example, excise duties on
       alcohol, tobacco and petrol are a specific amount (e.g. 10p a litre).

Impacts of a tax:

The diagram shows a specific tax. The introduction of the tax causes supply to shift from S1
to S2 because it leads to an increase in the cost of production. This leads to a rise in price
from P1 to P2 and a fall in output from Q1 to Q2. The consumer sees higher prices and
suffers from a tax burden of the orange area. The producer sees a rise in costs and a fall in
output, suffering from the tax burden of the grey area. The government gains tax revenue of
the shaded areas. The size of the tax is the vertical distance between S1 and S2, shown by
the line AB. The revenue the government raises will be equal to ABxQ2.




                                                                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
This diagram shows an ad valorem tax. The effects are the same but the supply curve shifts
and tilts, so that the gap between S1 and S2 grows. This is because the tax is a percentage
of the value. When the price is small, the tax will only be a small amount but when the price
is high, the tax will be a large amount. The vertical distance between the curve represents
the size of the tax, and so the distance grows since the tax grows.




                                                                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                               https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
 Price (£)        Quantity demanded               Quantity supplied   Quantity supplied after tax

 10               100                             1100                900

 9                200                             1000                800

 8                300                             900                 700

 7                400                             800                 600

 6                500                             700                 500

 5                600                             600                 400

 4                700                             500                 300

 3                800                             400                 200

 2                900                             300                 100



This table shows the effect of a £2 tax being imposed. The initial equilibrium price was £5.
With the new tax, when the business charges £5 for their product they only get £3 as £2 is
passed onto the government. As a result, if they are charging £5 with the tax, they are are
only willing to supply the same amount they were willing to if the price was £3 without the
tax. Quantity supplied moves up two boxes in the table, and the equilibrium price is now £6
where quantity demanded is equal to quantity supplied after tax. This means that the
incidence on the consumer is only £1 of the tax and the supplier is also only paying £1.

The incidence of tax:

      ●   The incidence of tax is the tax burden on the taxpayer.

      ●   If the demand curve (PED) is perfectly elastic, or the supply curve (PES) is perfectly
          inelastic, the supplier will pay all the tax. If the demand curve is perfectly inelastic,
          or the supply curve is perfectly elastic, all the tax will be passed on to the
          consumer.

      ●   In general, the more elastic the demand curve, or the more inelastic the supply curve,
          the lower the incidence of tax on the consumer, meaning the supplier has to pay
          more.

      ●   This means that, all other things being equal, the more inelastic the demand curve,
          the higher the revenue of tax for the government because quantity demanded falls
          less and the more goods that are bought, the higher the tax revenue.




                                                                                                      https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                              https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
Subsidies:

A subsidy is a grant given by the government and is the opposite of a tax, an extra
payment to encourage production/consumption of a good or service. They could be given to
necessities e.g. bread, companies employing disadvantaged workers or those manufacturing
in the UK to keep them competitive with imported goods.




The diagram shows an increase in supply from S1 to S2, since the producer sees a fall in
production costs due to the subsidy. As a result, there is a rise in output from Q1 to Q2 and a
fall in price from P1 to P2. The consumer subsidy is the orange box and the producer
subsidy is the grey box. The total shaded area represents government spending: this is
equal to the size of the subsidy (AB) times the new output (Q2).




         1.2.10 Alternative views of consumer behaviour
The underlying assumptions for all rational decision making is that customers aim to
maximise utility, companies aim to maximise profit and governments aim to maximise
welfare of citizens. However, people do not always behave rationally and this occurs for
three main reasons:




                                                                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
●   Influences of other people: Rationality assumes people act individually to maximise
    their own benefits but sometimes individuals are influenced by social norms, known
    as a bias. For example, someone may buy something to ‘fit-in’ or because everyone
    else has it, and so they are expected to too. Consumers become unwilling to change
    the bias, even if doing so will benefit them, if it goes against the norms of society.
    ‘Herding behaviour’ occurs when an individual copies the actions of a large group.
    One example is the stock market, and this causes huge market bubbles.

●   Influence of habitual behaviour: Most people have habits and these habits reduce
    the amount of time it takes to do something, because consumers no longer have to
    consciously think about their actions. Habits create a barrier to decision making since
    they limit or prevent consumers considering an alternative. Habitual behaviour
    includes addictions and so this influences people’s decisions, for example consumers
    will buy more drugs/alcohol even though they know they should give up. Another
    habit many consumers have is buying their products at eye level so supermarkets
    tend to keep higher priced products near the top and lower priced products lower.

●   Consumer weakness at computation: Many consumers aren’t willing or able to
    make comparisons between prices and so they will buy more expensive goods than
    needed, for example many customers buy multipack goods because they assume
    they are cheaper but this is not always the case. Also, consumers are sometimes
    poor at self-control and so do things they know they shouldn’t. Similarly, consumers
    will make decisions without looking at the long term effects, and so make irrational
    decisions. One example of this is consumers saving up for their pensions: many put
    off doing this because they fail to look long term.




                                                                                              https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                        https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
