 Edexcel Economics (A) A-level
Theme 1: Introduction to Markets
              and
        Market Failure
   1.4 Government Intervention
                Detailed Notes




        www.pmt.education
             1.4.1 Government intervention in markets
Indirect taxation:

When the good has a negative externality, the government can introduce indirect taxation to
prevent market failure. This will cause a fall in supply and increase the costs to the
individual, so the supply curve/MPC curve will shift from S1 to S2. The free market would
produce at P1Q1, where MPC=MPB, but the social optimum position is P2Q2, where
MSB=MSC. Following the introduction of the tax, the equilibrium position is S2=MPB=MSB,
at P2Q2. The tax internalises the externality and social welfare is now maximised.
This diagram shows a specific tax but an ad valorem tax could also be introduced, which
would have the same effect, but the shift of the curve would look slightly different.




Advantages:

   ●   It internalises the externality- the market now produces at the social equilibrium
       position and ​social welfare is maximised.
   ●   It raises ​government revenue​, which could be used to solve the externality in other
       ways such as through education. This may help goods to become more elastic in the
       long run. The effect will depend on what the government does with the revenue they
       raise.




                           www.pmt.education
Disadvantages​:

   ●   It is difficult to know the size of the externality and so it is ​difficult to target the tax​;
       the effect depends on where the tax is set. The government suffers from imperfect
       information when setting the tax.
   ●   There could be ​conflict between the government goal of raising revenue and solving
       the externality, which makes setting the tax difficult.
   ●   It could lead to the creation of a ​black market
   ●   If demand for the good is inelastic, then the tax will be ineffective at reducing output.
   ●   Taxes are ​politically unpopular and so governments may be reluctant to introduce
       them.
   ●   They are ​regressive​, meaning they the poor spend a larger proportion of their
       income on indirect taxes than the rich do.

Some examples of indirect taxes used for externalities in the UK are: landfill taxes, fuel
duties, alcohol duties, tobacco duties, air passenger duties and sugar taxes.



Subsidies:

In order to solve positive externalities, the government can introduce subsidies. Subsidies
can also be introduced in order to fix information gaps. This will shift the
supply curve to the right as it will lower the cost of production. The free market would
produce where MPC=MPB at Q1P1 whilst the social optimum position is where
MSC=MSB at P2Q2. The introduction of the subsidy means that the equilibrium point
is Q2P3, at the social optimum output. This means that social welfare is maximised since
the market produces at the output that best allocates resources.




                             www.pmt.education
Advantages:

   ●   Society reaches the social optimum output and ​welfare is maximised​.
   ●   They can have ​other positive impacts​, such as encouraging small businesses,
       bringing about equality and encouraging exports.



Disadvantages:

   ●   The government has to spend a large amount of money, which will have a ​high
       opportunity cost​.
   ●   As with taxes, they are ​difficult to target since the exact size of the externality is
       unknown.
   ●   Subsidies can cause producers to become ​inefficient​, especially if they are in place
       for a long time.
   ●   Once introduced, subsidies are ​difficult to remove​.

Some examples of subsidies are those on: biofuels, solar panels, apprenticeship schemes,
wind farms and rail industries.



Maximum and minimum prices:

For a maximum price to have an effect, it must be set below the current price equilibrium.
For a minimum price to have an effect, it must be above the current price equilibrium.

A ​maximum price is a legally imposed price for a good that the suppliers cannot charge
above. They are set on goods with positive externalities. For example, they are set on food
as a lack of food will have a negative impact on the NHS. This approach has sometimes
been applied to rents for accommodation when prices are too high. They can prevent
monopolies from exploiting customers. The equilibrium position is P1Q1 but the imposition of
the maximum price means there is excess demand of QD-QS, shown by the shaded area.




                           www.pmt.education
A ​minimum price ​is a legally imposed price at which the price of the good cannot go below.
They can be set on goods with negative externalities, so that the price is raised to the social
optimum point and consumption is discouraged. They also encourage producers to produce
goods, so can be set on goods with social benefits that are underprovided by the market. In
the diagram, the market equilibrium price is P1Q1. However, the minimum price is set at P2
and as a result QD is demanded but QS is supplied so there is excess supply of QS-QD,
shown by the shaded area.




Advantages:

   ●   They can be set where MSB=MSC, so allow for some consideration of externalities,
       and so help to increase social welfare.
   ●   A maximum price will ensure that goods are affordable, whilst a minimum price will
       ensure that producers get a fair price. Both of these are able to reduce poverty and
       can increase equity/equality.


Disadvantages:

   ●   There is a distortion of price signals and this causes ​excess supply/demand​.
       Excess demand will lead to questions about how to allocate goods and excess
       supply will lead to questions about what to do with the surplus goods.
   ●   It is ​difficult for the government to know where to set the prices​, because of the
       difficulty of knowing the size of externalities and because it will have implications on
       the size of excess supply/demand.
   ●   Both can lead to the creation of ​black markets​. Maximum prices may also lead to
       illegal bribes or discriminatory policies in allocating goods.

Maximum prices have been implemented in Manhattan in the from of rent controls on
properties. On top of this, there are price caps on milk, toilet paper, medicine, petrol and




                            www.pmt.education
other key goods in Venezuela: this has led to the creation of a black market and the goods
are no longer sold in supermarkets as the firms are unable to make a profit at those prices.

In Scotland, a minimum price has been imposed on alcohol. It targets the cheapest drinks,
which aims to cut down on binge drinking, but it will have negative effects on poverty for
those who are addicted. Minimum prices on Limousines in Nashville have stifled competition
as the most price competitive firms are forced out of business.




Tradable pollution permits:

A pollution permit allows the owner to pollute up to a specific amount of pollution and the
government controls how many permits there are so limits the maximum amount of pollution.
Companies have to buy permits in order to pollute so, in an attempt to cut costs and
increase profits, companies may use greener technology. Unused permits can be sold to
other companies, hence why they are tradeable. Companies exceeding their limit of pollution
will face legal action. As a fixed supply of permits is allocated, an increase in demand will
lead to an increase in price for the permits, so companies will have more incentive to cut
emissions by using green technology.




                           www.pmt.education
Advantages:

   ●   Since the government caps the number of permits, it is ​guaranteed that pollution
       will fall ​to the targets set by the government. This will maximise social welfare.
   ●   The government can ​raise revenue by selling permits and by fining firms who
       exceed their pollution limit.
   ●   This encourages companies to use and invest in ​green technology.
   ●   Firms are able to make their own decisions about whether to cut pollution or buy
       more permits. This helps encourage efficiency, as seen by the numerical example
       (this is not necessary in an exam but helps to understand the concept).

Disadvantages:

   ●   This can be ​expensive to monitor and police​, but it will only work if it is monitored
       well. The government needs to impose fines that are large enough to ensure firms
       follow the regulation.
   ●   It will ​raise costs for businesses, and it is likely that these higher costs will be
       passed onto consumers
   ●   It may be difficult to know ​how many permits​ the government should allow.

One successful example is the US Sulphur trading scheme, which reduced sulphur dioxide
by 40%. The EU Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) was launched in 2005 and it represents
a 21% reduction in greenhouse gases. Since then, other greenhouse gases like nitrous
oxide have been included and the scheme has been extended to the airline industry. The
permit scheme has also been introduced in China.



State provision of public goods:

Public goods are non-excludable and non-rivalry and so the free rider problem says they will
be under-provided by the free market, leading to market failure. As a result, the government
provides these public goods directly through taxation. Similarly, the government can provide
merit goods.

Advantages:

   ● This ​corrects market failure by providing important goods which would otherwise
     not be provided. It will lead to improved social welfare.
   ● It can help to bring about ​equality,​ by ensuring everyone has access to basic goods.
   ● There will be ​benefits of the goods themselves​, for example by providing
     healthcare, the government ensures that the workforce is healthy and so this can
     improve economic growth.
   ● By using competitive tenders (looked at in Theme 3), the government can ensure
     efficiency.




                           www.pmt.education
Disadvantages:

   ●   This is ​expensive and represents a ​high opportunity cost ​for the government.
       Administration costs are a problem
   ●   Since the market is not involved, the government may produce the ​wrong
       combination of goods as consumers can not indicate their preferences. For
       example, there may be too many soldiers and too few hospital beds: if they were
       provided by the market, price signals would lead to a shift in resources. Democracy
       aims to reduce this problem, since consumers can vote for political parties whose
       aims are similar to their own.
   ●   The government may be ​inefficient at production since they have no incentive to cut
       costs.
   ●   Government officials may suffer from ​corruption and conflicting objectives​.

In the UK, the government provides a number of goods including roads, education and
healthcare. The NHS suffers from severe underfunding and many schools are having their
budgets cut. Moreover, more money is spent on improving railways than roads, even though
92% of all journeys in the UK are made on roads, suggesting incorrect resource allocation​.



Provision of information:

When there is asymmetric information, the government provides information to allow people
to make informed decisions. They may also force companies to provide information.

Advantages:

   ●   This helps consumers to act​ rationally,​ which allows the market to work properly.
   ●   It is best if the government uses this ​alongside other policies​. For example, it can
       make demand more elastic in the long run and so help indirect taxes to become more
       effective at reducing output.

Disadvantages:

   ●   This can be ​expensive​ for the government to do, incurring an opportunity cost.
   ●   The government themselves may not always have all the information, so it may be
       difficult to inform consumers.
   ●   Consumers may ​not listen ​to the information provided due to irrational behaviour.

Some examples of information provision are labels on cigarette packages and information
campaigns on speeding, obesity, drinking and smoking. Consumer protection laws and
industry standards help to overcome problems relating to second hand products. The ‘traffic
light system’, where foods are rated green, orange or red on calories, sugar, salt etc. helps
to easily show consumers the healthier options. Despite these information campaigns, many
consumers still undertake harmful and dangerous activities.




                           www.pmt.education
Regulation:

Governments are able to impose laws and caps to ensure that levels are set where
MSB=MSC or to ensure that companies provide full information on products. The
government can also introduce regulatory bodies such as OFCOM for communications and
OFGEN for energy. These ensure firms follow regulation and do not exploit their customers
or take advantage of market position.

Advantages:

   ●   This can ensure consideration of externalities, prevent exploitation of consumers and
       keep consumers fully informed. This will help to overcome market failure and
       maximise social welfare.

Disadvantages:

   ●   Laws may be ​expensive​ for the government to monitor, incurring an opportunity cost.
   ●   They don’t take into account the different costs of following the laws for different
       companies. Compared with tradable pollution permits, regulation is a ​less efficient
       method of reducing pollution.
   ●   The government can suffer from ​regulatory capture​ (looked at in Theme 3).
   ●   Firms may ​pass on costs​ to the consumer in the form of higher prices.
   ●   Excessive regulation may reduce competition in a market and efficiency, by
       increasing bureaucracy and reducing innovation.

A number of regulations are in place to correct market failure in the UK such as: EU fishing
quotas, smoking bans, minimum ages laws and maximum vehicle CO2 emissions.




                          1.4.2 Government failure
Government failure:

Government failure is when government intervention in the market leads to net welfare loss
and a misallocation of resources. The total social costs arising from the intervention are
greater than the social benefit. There are a number of causes of government failure:

Distortion of price signals:




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   Some types of government intervention change price signals in the market and distort
       the free market mechanism. As a result, they keep some companies in business
       when they are inefficient so the resources should be switched to somewhere else
       (subsidies) or make consumers pay too much for a good (taxes).

   ●   For example, subsidies keep farmers in employment when they cannot produce
       cheaply enough to be competitive. The result is that the government keeps them in
       business when they should close down and find an alternative use for their
       resources.

   ●   Maximum and minimum prices lead to excess demand/supply and make it difficult to
       allocate resources.

   ●   The price mechanism aims to allocate resources to their best use and where
       consumers want and value them most highly. By intervening, the government distorts
       the mechanism and so resources may be allocated inefficiently.

Unintended consequences:

   ●   Some interventions cause effects which the government did not intend to happen.
       Consumers and producers may react to new policies in unexpected ways and so the
       policy doesn’t have the effect it should.

   ●   One example is the introduction of the buffer stock scheme CAP (Common
       Agricultural Policy) in the EU. This was meant to smooth out the price fluctuations but
       it ended up leading to overproduction in the EU and a fall in agricultural prices in
       other parts of the world as EU surpluses were disposed of at cheap prices outside of
       Europe; this was not the intention of the scheme​.

   ●   On top of this, targets for treating patients on the NHS has led to a reduction in the
       quality of care. This is not what the government intended when they introduced the
       targets.

Excessive administration costs:

   ●   In many cases, a lot of money that is allocated by the government is actually used up
       on basic administration costs. The social costs may be higher than social benefits,
       once administration costs are taken into account.

   ●   A lot of money given to the NHS etc. is actually spent on organisational adminstration
       rather than putting the money into medical care​.

   ●   Excessive administration on the Apprenticeship Levy, which aims to increase the
       quality and quantity of apprenticeships, has meant that little money is spent by firms.

Information gaps:




                           www.pmt.education
●   Any decisions that the government makes must be based on some data but the
    information they have is always going to be limited, for example you cannot
    accurately predict the number of cancer patients or the number of cars on the road.

●   Cost and benefit forecasts of investment are often wrong and so the government
    invests in a system where the costs are higher than the benefits, so there is welfare
    loss. It is impractical, and usually impossible, for the government to get every piece of
    information they need.




                        www.pmt.education
