Edexcel Economics (A) A-level
 Theme 2: The UK Economy -
  Performance and Policies
    2.2 Aggregate Demand
               Detailed Notes




       www.pmt.education
         2.2.1 The characteristics of Aggregate Demand

Aggregate demand (AD) is the ​total level of spending ​in the economy at any given price


Components of AD:

AD= C+I+G+(X-M)
Aggregate demand is made up of consumption (C), investment (I), government spending (G)
and net exports (X-M).

   ●   Consumption ​is consumer spending on goods and services; it makes up about 60%
       of AD, so is the biggest part.

   ●   Investment is spending by businesses on capital goods, such as new equipment
       and buildings as well as working capital e.g. stocks and work in progress; it makes up
       about 15-20% of AD. Most investment is by the private sector (about 75%) but there
       is also investment by the government.

   ●   Government spending is spending by the government on providing goods and
       services, generally public and merit goods, both on wages and salaries of public
       sector workers and on investment goods like new roads and schools. This will
       change year on year as governments decides how much they spend. Transfer
       payments such as pensions and jobseekers’ allowances aren’t included in the figure
       as money is just transferred from one group to another. Government spending tends
       to be around 18-20% of GDP.

   ●   Net exports is exports minus imports: when imports are higher than exports this is a
       minus figure as more money leaves the UK than comes in. The UK has a large trade
       deficit, but this minor figure and is the least significant part of AD at around 5%.


The AD curve:
The AD curve is the same as the demand curve for an individual market, but instead of
showing the relationship between price and output, it shows the ​relationship between price
level and real GDP. Like the demand curve, the AD curve is ​downward sloping as a rise in
prices causes a fall in real GDP and there are four key reasons for this:

   ●   Income effect: As a rise in prices is not matched straight away by a rise in income,
       people have lower real incomes so can afford to buy less, leading to a contraction
       demand.

   ●   Substitution effect: If prices in the UK rise, less foreigners will want to buy British
       exports and more UK residents will want to buy imported foreign goods because they
       are cheaper. The rise in imports and fall of exports will decrease net exports so AD
       will contract.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   Real balance effect​: A rise in prices will mean that the amount people have saved
       up will no longer be worth as much and so will offer less security. As a result, they will
       want to save more and so reduce their spending, causing a contraction in AD.

   ●   Interest rate effect: Rising prices mean firms have to pay their workers more and so
       there is higher demand for money. If supply stays the same, then the ‘price of money’
       i.e. interest rates will rise because of this higher demand. Higher interest rates mean
       that more people will save and less will borrow and will also mean that businesses
       invest less, so AD will contract.




Movement and shifts along the AD curve​: Like with demand, there can be movements
in the AD curve or there can be shifts. A movement along the AD curve is caused by a
change in prices​, caused by inflation or deflation. A shift of the AD curve is caused by a
change in any other variable​. Again, as with demand, a shift to the right represents an
increase in AD and a shift to the left represents a fall in AD.

   ●   It is important to distinguish between rates of change and absolute change: a fall in
       the amount of consumption will reduce AD but a fall in the rate of rise of consumption
       means that consumption is still rising so AD will still increase but by not as much.

   ●   Some factors, for example interest rates, could cause a movement or a shift in the
       AD curve. When prices increase, interest rates rise (because of the interest rate
       effect) and this causes a movement along the AD curve but if the government
       increases the interest rate then there is a shift in the AD curve. It is important to
       always ​look at whether the change is because of price or not.




                            www.pmt.education
                              2.2.2 Consumption
Consumption is ​spending on consumer goods and services​ over a period of time.


Disposable income:

Disposable income (Y) is the ​money consumers have left to spend​, after taxes have been
taken away and any state benefits have been added. This means that disposable income is
affected by government taxation as well as wages.

   ●   It is the ​most important factor in determining the level of consumption​. Those
       who are earning a large income will be able to spend much more than those on a
       minimum wage.

   ●   However, we are also concerned with how much an increase in income affects
       consumption, this is called the ​marginal propensity to consume (MPC). For most
       people, MPC will be positive but less than 1 i.e. an increase in income increases
       spending but spending doesn’t increase by as much as income. Some people will
       have an MPC of more than one as they use borrowing or savings to fulfil the demand
       for goods which is higher than their increase in income.

   ●   Poorer people tend to have a higher MPC as they are likely to spend much more of
       their increase in income whilst richer people are more likely to save it.

   ●   The average propensity to consume (APC) is the average amount spent on
       consumption out of total income. In an industrialised country, the APC for the
       economy is likely to be less than one as people save some of their earnings.

MPC= ​change in consumption
        change in income

APC= ​total consumption
        total income



Relationship between savings and consumption:

   ●   Savings is what is not spent out of income. An increase in consumption decreases
       savings so the same factors which affect consumption are those which affect
       savings- but in the opposite way. For example, a rise in confidence will decrease
       savings.

   ●   The marginal propensity to save (MPS) is how much of an increase in income is
       saved whilst the average propensity to save (APS) is the average amount saved out
       of income.




                          www.pmt.education
MPS= ​change in savings
      change in income

APS= ​total savings
      total income


Other influences on consumer spending:

   ●   Interest rates​: ​Most major expenditures are bought on credit so therefore the
       interest rate will affect the cost of the good for consumers. If interest rates are high,
       the price of the good will effectively be higher since more interest needs to be paid
       back and this will lead to a reduction in consumption. High interest rates also
       increase mortgage repayments so reduce consumption. Also, a rise in interest rates
       decreases the value of shares and so people experience a negative wealth effect.


   ●   Consumer confidence: ​One major factor that affects people’s spending is what
       they think will happen in the future. If people are confident about the future and
       expect pay rises, then they will continue or increase their spending. If they expect
       high levels of inflation in the future, they will buy now as it will be at a cheaper price,
       so consumption will increase. If they expect a recession and fear possible
       unemployment, consumption will decrease as people may save more. Expectations
       about a change in the taxation level will affect consumption: if consumers expect tax
       to increase prices in the future, they will buy now whilst if they expect it to reduce
       prices in the future, they will delay their purchases. Similarly, expectations on interest
       rates will affect consumption: if consumers expect interest rates to fall they may delay
       their purchases as things on credit will be cheaper.


   ●   Wealth effects​: Wealth is a stock of assets. People with greater wealth tend to
       have greater levels of consumption, known as the wealth effect: a change in
       consumption following a change in wealth. The wealth effect is experienced when
       real house prices rise as owners now have more wealth so are more confident with
       spending as they know that if they go into financial difficulty they could simply borrow
       more against the house, since their house is worth more than their current mortgage.
       It can also be experienced when share prices rise as people may sell some of their
       shares and spend the money or may be more confident in spending the money they
       have as they know they have the shares to fall back on in case of financial difficulty.
       Greater wealth will improve a consumer’s confidence and thus lead to greater
       spending.


   ●   Distribution of income: ​Those on high incomes tend to save a higher percentage
       of their income than those on low incomes and so a change in the distribution of
       money in the economy will affect the level of consumption. If money is moved from
       the rich to the poor, consumption is likely to increase as the poor have a higher MPC.




                            www.pmt.education
   ●   Tastes and attitudes: ​In our modern society, there is a strong materialistic drive
       that encourages people to have the newest and the best and therefore spending can
       be very high, in some cases even above income. If people were less materialistic,
       consumption would decrease.



                                 2.2.3 Investment

Investment is the ​addition of capital stock to the economy i.e. machines and factories
used to produce other goods and services. It is only seen as investment if real products are
created so buying a share in a company would be saving but buying new machinery is
investment.


Gross and net investment

Machinery depreciates (loses its value) over time as it wears out or gets used up. ​Gross
investment is the amount of investment carried out and ignores the level of depreciation,
whilst ​net investment​ is gross investment minus the value of depreciation.

For example, if a firm was to buy 5 new machines then the gross investment would be the
value of these 5 machines but if they also got rid of 2 old machines then the net investment
would be the value of the 5 machines minus the value of the 2 old machines. The distinction
between net and gross investment is important as in the UK ​depreciation accounts for about
75% of gross investment​.



Influences on investment:

   ●   Rate of economic growth: ​In a growing economy, there will be higher levels of
       investment as businesses would be more confident about their investments and the
       higher demand would lead to a higher return rate on the investment. For example,
       buying a new machine would lead to more products being made, but if the economy
       was declining these products wouldn’t be bought so there would be no or little return
       on the investment. On top of this, a growing economy needs more investment in
       order to cope with the higher levels of demand. If the same products and the same
       output is being produced every year, and no more is demanded, investment will stay
       the same as firms only have to replace old machines. However, if the economy is
       growing, firms will need to increase investment to match the level of demand and if it
       is shrinking, firms will not need to replace their old machines and so investment will
       fall.




                           www.pmt.education
●   Business expectations and confidence- ‘Animal spirits’: ​When businesses
    are confident about the future and expect future growth, investment will increase as
    they want to prepare for the future. If they are fearful of the future, then they will not
    invest money in new ideas or machinery. John Maynard Keynes used the term
    ‘animal spirits’ to describe the feeling of managers and owners of firms on whether
    their investment would be profitable. He argued that it is difficult to measure.

●   Demand for exports: ​If the world economy is booming, demand for exports is
    likely to increase and therefore exporting firms’ investment is likely to increase to
    cope with this extra demand. This will have a knock-on effect and encourage other
    firms to increase their investment.

●   Interest rates: ​Most investment is done through borrowing. High interest rates
    mean that borrowing is more expensive, so a business needs to be more confident of
    good profits in order to cover the extra costs of borrowing. Other investment is done
    through retained profits or savings. A rise in interest rates increases the opportunity
    cost of a business using retained profits as they are able to get higher interest
    payments than before. Keynes’ Marginal Efficiency of Capital (MEC) graph shows
    how higher interest rates will lead to a fall in investment. This displays the expected
    rate of return from an investment at a particular given time. If interest rate is at 10%
    then firms need an expected rate of return which is at least equal to 10% to make it
    worthwhile.

●   Influence of government and regulations: ​Governments can encourage
    investment by their own policy decisions. For example, they could offer tax breaks or
    grants to businesses to try and encourage them to invest. Regulations also affects
    investment as a highly regulated economy tends to see less investment as regulation
    increases the cost and time taken to invest, such as planning regulations.

●   Access to credit: ​Investment will be lower when an investment has a high risk
    attached to it, as it means there will be less access to credit and interest rates will be
    higher. In recessions, it is usually more difficult to access credit as risks are higher
    and banks become more risk aware, fearing firms will not be able to pay the money
    back.

●   Retained profit: ​Retained profits are the profits kept by a firm and not shared with
    shareholders or used to pay taxes. Not all firms, particularly small firms, take into
    account the opportunity cost of investment from their retained profits i.e. the interest




                         www.pmt.education
       gained from keeping it in a bank account. Many firms are also unwilling to borrow
       money for investment in case the investment fails to make a profit and they are
       unable to pay it back. Therefore, if firms are making higher retained profits,
       investment is likely to increase as they have money available to invest.

   ●   Technological change: ​Improvements in technology will improve or speed up
       production which will increase the level of profitability, meaning the investment has a
       better prospect of success. Change also means businesses need to invest to keep
       up with the best technology.

   ●   Costs: ​A rise in the cost of any capital project increases the level of risk that you are
       taking and therefore leads to lower levels of investment. Also, rises in the costs of
       making goods, such as the raw materials and wage, will decrease investment as it
       will reduce profitability. This means firms have less money to invest and decreases
       the rate of return on their investment.



                         2.2.4 Government spending
The government has a very significant part to play in the level of AD, through spending. They
spend money on defence, education, the NHS etc. The impact of a rise in government
spending depends on the changes in tax: if government spending and tax rise by the same
amount then there is likely to be no overall increase in demand as people have less
disposable income so C decreases but G increases.


Influences on government expenditure:

   ●   The trade cycle​: Decisions over government expenditure may be made in order to
       manage AD, and therefore regulate the trade cycle. In a recession, the government
       may increase spending in order to increase demand to reduce unemployment.
       Government spending also automatically rises during a recession as they have to
       spend more on unemployment benefits. During booms, the government may
       decrease spending to decrease demand and reduce inflation.

   ●   Fiscal policy: ​Some government spending is fixed from year to year, for example
       schools must be funded and pensions must be paid. However, governments can vary
       what they spend each year, and this is set out in their budget. Fiscal policy is the
       decisions about government spending and taxes and it will depend on the priorities of
       the government. The level of government spending depends on what they lay out in
       their fiscal policy.

   ●   Age distribution of the population: ​An ageing population leads to increased
       government expenditure on pensions, social care etc. whilst a young population
       leads to increased spending on education. The more dependents in the economy
       (the young and old), the higher government spending tends to be.




                            www.pmt.education
                                     2.2.5 Net trade
Exporting goods abroad brings money into the country as there is an increase in AD whilst
importing goods means money leaves the country. Net trade is the ​total exports minus the
total imports.


Influences on net trade balance:

   ●   Real income: ​When real income in the UK is high, there tends to be increased
       imports as people demand more goods and services and the UK is unable to meet
       their needs. This will mean that net trade decreases. However, if an increase in real
       income is due to export-led growth then net trade will increase. Therefore, the effect
       of changes in real incomes is dependent on many factors.

   ●   Exchange rates: A strong pound (when the pound is worth a lot in comparison to
       other countries) makes imports cheap and exports dear because it costs foreigners
       more to buy pounds with their local currency. As a result, imports will increase and
       exports will decrease so net trade will decrease. This depends on the elasticity of
       imports and exports. If imports are price elastic, a rise in price will cause a large fall in
       demand so the value of imports will fall. If imports are inelastic, a rise in price only
       leads to a small fall in the amount of imports so the value of imports will rise. This is
       the same for exports: if prices rise and PED is inelastic then there will be a rise in
       value but if they are elastic then it will cause a fall in value. If both imports and
       exports are elastic, a rise in the value of the pound will lead to a fall in net trade. This
       is looked at in more detail in Theme Four (4.1.8)

   ●   State of world economy: If the UK’s main export country is doing well, then UK
       exports are likely to rise and so net trade is likely to rise. The effect of the state of the
       world economy is dependent on which countries are doing well and the trade
       relationship the UK has with them.

   ●   Degree of protectionism: ​Protectionism is an attempt to prevent domestic
       producers suffering from competition abroad. Tariffs, quotas and technical barriers
       are introduced which makes it harder for producers from abroad to sell their goods in
       the UK. If there is high protectionism on UK exports in other countries, exports will
       decrease as it will be harder for UK firms to sell their goods in other countries. If there
       is high protectionism on imports into the UK, imports will decrease. If the UK imposes
       protectionist measures, other countries are likely to retaliate and therefore exports
       are likely to decrease. Free trade means that net trade will be a more significant part
       of AD, whether this be in a positive or negative sense.

   ●   Non-price factors: ​Two non-price factors which affect net trade are quality and
       design and marketing. If UK goods are of a higher quality and design, exports will be




                            www.pmt.education
    high as foreign demand for UK goods will increase and imports will decrease as
    people will buy the British goods instead of foreign goods. This means net trade will
    increase. If UK goods are well marketed, people will have a stronger desire to buy
    British goods so exports will increase and imports will decrease, so net trade will
    increase. Strong quality/design and marketing will mean that British exports are likely
    to be more inelastic.

●   Prices: ​High prices of UK goods will mean that the goods are less competitive
    compared to international goods since people make decisions partly based on price.
    This means the volume of exports will decrease and the volume of imports will
    increase Prices are affected by the inflation rate: if the UK inflation rate is higher than
    other countries, prices will rise faster. They are also affected by productivity in UK
    (output per worker) as higher productivity leads to lower costs and so prices will be
    low. The effects of changing prices on the value of imports and exports depends on
    the price elasticity of demand. If PED is elastic, then higher prices will lead to a fall in
    net trade.




                         www.pmt.education
