Edexcel Economics (A) A-level
 Theme 2: The UK Economy -
  Performance and Policies
     2.4 National Income
               Detailed Notes




       www.pmt.education
                           2.4.1 National income

The circular flow of income:




  ●   The most basic form of the model shows a ​two-sector economy​: with just the
      households and the sellers.
         o Households ​own all the wealth and resources so provide the firms with
            land, labour and capital in return for rent, wages, interest and profits.
         o They use this money to buy goods and services produced by the firms.
         o Money ​(represented by the green arrows) flows in one direction and goods,
            services and ​factors of production​ (orange arrows) flow in another.
         o In this model there are three ways of measuring the level of economic activity:
            the national output, the value of the flow of goods and services from firms to
            households; the national expenditure, the value of spending by households
            on goods and services; and the national income; of income paid by firms to
            households in return for land, labour, capital and enterprise.
         o In this simple model, the ​national output=national expenditure=national
            income​.


  ●   However, the two-sector model is ​too simplified ​to represent the actual economy:
        o Firstly, the ​government needs to be added: they take money out of the
           economy through ​taxation ​(T) and add money by ​spending ​(G). If the
           government spends more than it takes away, it can increase the flow of
           income.
        o Next, we add to the model by introducing ​financial services who can inject
           money into the system through ​investment ​(I) and take money away when
           consumers or producers ​save​ (S).




                         www.pmt.education
           o   Finally, ​foreign markets are added as foreigners buy British goods so
               exports ​(X) add money to the flow but British people want to buy foreign
               goods so ​imports (M) take money away from the flow. The difference
               between the level of imports and exports is the balance of trade.


Income and wealth:

Wealth is a ​stock of assets whilst income is a ​flow​. Wealth is the things people own e.g.
houses, possessions whilst income is the money they receive e.g. money from work, interest
from savings. Countries with high levels of wealth tend to have high levels of income and
vice versa but there is not a perfect correlation between wealth and income.



                     2.4.2 Injections and withdrawals

Injections and withdrawals:
   ●   Injections are monetary additions to the economy:
           o government spending (G),
           o investment (I)
           o exports (X).

   ●   Withdrawals or leakages are where money is removed from the economy:
          o taxes (T)
          o savings (S)
          o imports (M).

   ●   If the sum of injections is greater than the sum of leakages/withdrawals, then the
       economy will be growing whilst if injections are smaller than withdrawals, it will be
       shrinking.

   ●   In an equilibrium, injections must be equal to withdrawals and so the national income
       remains the same.



          2.4.3 Equilibrium levels of real national output
The equilibrium position of national output is where the ​AD and AS curves intersect. If
either AS or AD are shifted, then the equilibrium position will change. The size of this change
will depend on the size of the shift and the elasticity of the curve which has not moved i.e.
the elasticity of AS if AD has moved.




                            www.pmt.education
Short term:

   ●   Both Keynesian and Classical economists agree that in the short run ​AD will be
       downward sloping and AS will be upward sloping.




The initial equilibrium level is P1Y1, where AD1 and SRAS1 intersect. However, the increase
in SRAS to SRAS2 has changed the equilibrium position to P2Y2. There has been a fall in
the price level and an increase in real GDP. A decrease in SRAS would lead to higher prices
and lower real GDP.




The initial equilibrium level is P1Y1 where AD1=SRAS1. The increase in the AD curve to
AD2 has led to a change in equilibrium to P2Y2. Prices and real GDP are higher. A fall in AD
would lead to lower prices and lower real GDP.




                           www.pmt.education
Long term:

Classical LRAS:

   ●   As the classical LRAS curve is ​perfectly inelastic (i.e. a change in price has no
       effect on change in output), a ​shift of the AD curve would not affect long run
       national output and would only affect price levels. Classical economists believe that
       the economy will always return to full employment level and therefore there will be no
       unemployment in the long run.




They believe that the increase in AD from AD​1 to AD​2 will lead to a positive output gap. The
economy is in long term disequilibrium as SRAS​1 and AD​2 do not intersect on the LRAS
curve. The short-term equilibrium is P2Y2. This means that there is over-full employment
and firms will end up bidding up wages of labour (as each of them offers a higher salary in
order to attract the best workers) and the other factor prices. As a result, SRAS shifts to
SRAS​2 as​ the cost of production has increased. Eventually, the economy is producing the
same amount but now at higher prices: they are producing at Y1P3. The short run
equilibrium has shifted and is now the same as the long run equilibrium.

   ●   Classicists conclude that an increase in AD will increase price and output in the short
       run but over time, prices will continue to rise as the economy moves back to the
       long-term equilibrium. Therefore, output has not changed and ​the only way to
       increase output is by increasing the LRAS​. Changes in AD without a change in
       the LRAS are only inflationary.




                           www.pmt.education
The initial equilibrium is where AD1=LRAS1 at P1Y1. The increase in LRAS from LRAS1 to
LRAS2 has caused lower prices and higher output, at P2Y2. Although there is short term
disequilibrium, as SRAS1 does not intersect the curve at this point, they believe this will be
closed by a shift in SRAS.

   ●   A rise in long run aggregate supply is likely to lead to ​lower prices and higher
       output​. When this is compared to a rise in AD which causes increase prices and no
       higher output, it is clear to see why classical economists ​favour supply-side
       policies over demand management​.


Keynesian LRAS:

   ●   Keynesian economists agree with classicists that there is full employment where the
       LRAS is vertical. However, they believe ​there can be equilibrium at less than full
       employment​- where the curve is horizontal. This is because they don’t believe that a
       rise in unemployment rapidly leads to a fall in real wages.




                           www.pmt.education
Keynesians would agree with classicists that a shift from AD​3 to AD​4 is purely inflationary
and would only increase price not output, as equilibrium point changes from P2Y3 to P3Y3.
However, they believe if the economy is in a deep recession then an increase from AD​1 to
AD​2 is
     ​  the opposite and only increases output not price. The equilibrium changes from P1Y1
to P1Y2. A shift of any AD curve to or from AD5 would lead to a change both in price and
equilibrium.

   ●   With a Keynesian curve, the impact of a shift in AD strongly ​depends on the
       elasticity of the curve, and hence whether the economy is at or near full
       employment.




If the economy is producing at or near full employment, for example at AD1, then a rise in
LRAS will increase output and decrease the price level. This is seen by the change in
equilibrium from P1Y1 to P2Y2 following the shift. However, if the economy is in a deep
recession, for example producing at AD2, then an increase in LRAS will have no effect on
prices or output. This is shown by the fact the equilibrium is still at P3Y3.

   ●   This is why Keynesians argue that ​during recessions the government needs to
       work to increase AD​ rather than using supply side policies.



Increasing aggregate demand and supply:

In microeconomics, any factor which affected demand would not affect supply and vice
versa. However, with macroeconomics, ​a factor which affects AD can easily affect AS​.
One example of this could be investment: investment is a component of AD so an increase
in investment will increase AD but it could also increase LRAS as firms are able to produce
more if they have more machines etc. This may mean that the long run disequilibrium
caused by the shift in AD will be brought back to equilibrium by an increase in LRAS rather




                           www.pmt.education
than a fall in AD. However, not all investment results in increased production (e.g. a firm may
invest but then go out of business) and so the LRAS will not increase. Therefore, the extent
to which investment increases output and lessens inflation depends on its rate of return.



                                2.4.4 The Multiplier

The multiplier process and ratio:

   ●   The multiplier process is the idea that an increase in AD because of an ​increased
       injection ​(exports, government spending or investment) can lead to a ​further
       increase in national income.

   ●   It is the ratio of ​the final change in income to the initial change in injection​; and
       the figure multiplied by the original injection to find the final change in income.


   ●   The initial injection will represent an increase in spending and will increase income
       for someone else which will then lead to further consumption spending. For example,
       if the government spends £100m to create jobs and withdrawals are taken into
       account, the £100m of government spending could lead to an extra £90m being
       spent by those who have the jobs, of which another £81m will be spent by those who
       received the £90m and so on. In this case, the MPC is 0.9 and the multiplier is 10.
       The extra consumption creates more jobs and increases output.


   ●   The size of the multiplier will be determined by how much of an increase in income
       people will spend, ​the marginal propensity to consume (MPC). The lower the
       leakages, the higher the MPC, the bigger the multiplier.


   ●   The multiplier is able to work due to the concept of ​circular flow​, since one person’s
       spending is another’s income. The IMF have calculated that in developed countries,
       the ​multiplier tends to be around 1.5 in the long run and about 1.6 for developing
       countries​.

   ●   A ​negative multiplier effect can also occur i.e. a withdrawal from the economy
       could lead to an even further fall in income, decreasing economic growth and
       possibly leading to a decline in the economy. This means that government plans to
       cut deficits will lead to an even further decrease of the economy.




                            www.pmt.education
Effects on the economy:

   ●   The multiplier means that ​growth can occur quicker​, as any injections lead to a
       bigger increase in national income. Injections can be ​targeted at those with the
       biggest MPC​ in order to increase the size of the multiplier.


   ●   For example, if the government is trying to stimulate the economy they will want to
       give the more money to people with the highest MPC: those on low incomes.
       Governments use changes in spending to influence macroeconomic performance,
       but it is ​impossible for the government to know the exact effect of their
       spending​ as it is difficult to know the size of the multiplier.


   ●   As with many things in macroeconomics, there will also be a ​time lag between the
       increase in income and the full effect of that increase as not everyone will spend the
       money straight away.


   ●   The overall effect on the economy will depend on the change in AD and the elasticity
       of the AS curve.




Effects of the marginal propensities:

Marginal propensity to consume (MPC): The increase in consumption following an
increase in income

Marginal propensity to save (MPS): ​The increase in savings following an increase in
income
Marginal propensity to tax (MPT):​ The increase in taxation following an increase in income
Marginal propensity to import (MPM): The increase in imports following an increase in
income

Marginal propensity to withdraw (MPW): The increase in leakages following an increase
in income ​MPW=MPS+MPT+MPM


   ●   The multiplier is dependent on MPC and so can change all the time. MPC depends
       on a range of factors; any factor that affects consumption (as a component of AD) will
       affect the MPC, for example a change in interest rates will affect the MPC.

   ●   The higher the MPC, the bigger the multiplier as this means more money of income is
       spent so more money is transferred through the circular flow and less is withdrawn.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   The other marginal propensities show how much of a change is income is withdrawn
       from the economy i.e. how much is not spent. An increase in any of these will
       decrease the MPC. A change in tax will affect MPC (ceteris paribus) as it will
       increase the MPT. Any factor other than income that affects imports, for example the
       quality of imported goods, will affect MPM and therefore MPC.

Multiplier= ​ 1   ​= ​ 1
           (1-MPC) MPW

e.g. If MPC is 0.9 and the increase in government spending is £50,000, what will the
increase in national income be?

Multiplier = ​ 1 ​ =10
            1-0.9
Increase in national income: 50,000 x 10=£500,000


Effects of a change in AD:

   ●   The multiplier leads to an increase in AD higher than the original increase but for it to
       have the desired effect, there must be sufficient ​spare capacity in the economy (i.e.
       it cannot be at full output) for extra output to be produced.

   ●   If the AS is perfectly inelastic, like on the classical LRAS curve, then the only impact
       of the multiplier will be to increase price; it will not affect output in the long run,
       although it will in the short run. The more ​elastic the curve, the smaller the effect on
       price but the bigger the effect on output.

   ●   Therefore, as with any increase in AD, the effect of the multiplier depends on the
       shape of the AS curve and whether it is short run or long run. ​The size of the
       increase in AD will depend on both the size of the initial increase in AD and the size
       of the multiplier.


In general, the multiplier will have a big effect when there is plenty of spare capacity in the
economy and the MPW is low/MPC is higher. It has little effect on output when there is little
spare capacity in the economy so the rising demand only creates rising prices.




                            www.pmt.education
