 Edexcel Economics (A) A-level
Theme 3: Business Behaviour and
              the
         Labour Market
 3.3 Revenues, Costs and Profits
                            Detailed Notes




               https://bit.ly/pmt-edu-cc
  This work by PMT                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                        Education is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND      4.0


                                                                            https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                  https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                    https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                                      3.3.1 Revenue

Types of revenue:

Revenue is the money earned from the sale of goods and services:

   ●   Total revenue (TR): The total amount of money coming into the business through
       the sale of goods and services. quantity x price
   ●   Average revenue (AR)​: Demand is equal to AR: ​total revenue
                                                               output
   ●   Marginal revenue (MR): The extra revenue that the firm earns from selling one more
       unit of production: total revenue from ‘N’ goods- total revenue from (N-1) goods OR
        ​change in total revenue
            change in output



Price elasticity:

Some firms experience a ​perfectly elastic demand curve​; these are firms in perfect
competition, a concept looked at in the next unit. These firms have no price setting power. In
this case, the price received by the firm for the good is constant and so MR=AR=D. Their
demand curve is horizontal. The TR curve is upward sloping because prices are constant
and so the more goods that are sold, the higher the revenue made.




                                                                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
However, for most goods, the price decreases as output increases and there is a ​downward
sloping demand curve ​and therefore a downward sloping AR curve. The demand curve for
the firm is the same as the firm’s AR revenue curve, as it indicates the price that consumers
are willing to pay for each quantity sold. Firms with a downward sloping demand curve are
firms that are in imperfect competition and so they have some ​price setting power​.




For goods with a downward sloping demand curve, the ​elasticity of the curve is linked to
marginal revenue​. In Theme 1, we ignored that the price elasticity of demand changes
along the demand curve. The concept of price elasticity and revenue learnt in Theme 1 can
be developed and connected to MR in this unit:

   ●   If ​marginal revenue is positive​, when the firm sells the product at a lower price (or
       when they increase output), total revenue still grows and so the demand curve is
       elastic​. Up until output Q, the demand curve is elastic.
   ●   If ​MR is negative​, TR decreases as price decreases (or output increases) and so the
       demand curve is​ inelastic​. After output Q, the demand curve is inelastic.
   ●   When ​MR=0​, ​TR is maximised and the demand curve is ​unitary elastic​; this is at
       point Q.

This explains why the ​TR curve is a U-shape​: at first, total revenue rises with output (when
MR is positive) but it then begins to decline (when MR is negative).




                                                                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                                          3.3.2 Costs

Types of costs:

The economic cost of production for a firm is the ​opportunity cost of production​; the value
that could have been generated had the resources been employed in their next best use.

In the short run, at least one factor of production is fixed and cannot be changed and so
therefore some costs are fixed whilst in the long run, all costs are variable e.g. more property
can be used so rent becomes higher.

   ●   Total cost (TC)​: The cost of producing a given level of output: fixed + variable costs
   ●   Total fixed cost (TFC)​: Costs that do not change with output and remain constant
       e.g. rent, machinery
   ●   Total variable cost (TVC): ​Costs that change directly with output e.g. materials
   ●   Average (total) cost (ATC)​: ​total costs
                                      output
   ●   Average fixed cost (AFC)​: ​total fixed cost
                                        output
   ●   Average variable cost (AVC):​ ​total variable cost
                                            output
   ●   Marginal cost (MC):​ The extra cost of producing one extra unit of a good:
       total cost of producing N goods - total cost of producing (N-1) goods OR
       change in total cost
        change in output



Short run cost curves:

   ●   The short run is the length of time when ​at least one factor of production is fixed
       and cannot be changed; this varies massively with different types of production. The
       long run is when ​all factors of production become variable.

Diminishing marginal productivity:

   ●   If a factor of production is fixed, this will ​affect the business if it decides to
       expand. More workers can be added relatively easily and this will see an increase in
       production as machinery is used more efficiently. However, it will take a long time for
       the factory to expand and adding more labour will mean that they will have less and
       less impact on the amount produced as they get in the way and have no machines to
       use. This is called the Law of Diminishing Returns or ​diminishing marginal
       productivity​.

   ●   Diminishing marginal productivity means that if a variable factor is increased when
       another factor is fixed, there will come a point when each extra unit of the variable
       factor will produce less extra output than the previous unit.




                                                                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                            https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
   ●   Marginal output will decrease as more inputs are added in the short run. This will
       mean that the ​marginal cost of production will rise.


Curves:




   ●   The ​average fixed cost curve (AFC) starts high because the whole fixed costs are
       being divided by a small output. As output is increased, AFC falls as the same
       amount is divided by a larger number.
   ●   The ​average total cost curve (AC/ATC) is U-Shaped due to the law of diminishing
       marginal productivity. Costs initially fall as machinery is used more efficiently but as
       production continues to expand, efficiency falls as machinery is overused.
   ●   The ​average variable cost curve (AVC) is also U-Shaped, but it gets closer to ATC
       as output increases since AFC gets smaller.
   ●   The ​marginal cost (MC) will also be U-Shaped due to the law of diminishing
       marginal productivity. It will initially fall as the machines are used more efficiently but
       will rise as production continues to rise.

The marginal cost line will always cut the AC line at the lowest point on the AC curve: if MC
is below AC, then AC will continue to fall since producing one more costs less than the
average so the average falls; but if MC is above AC, then AC will rise. Marginal costs can be
rising whilst AC is still falling, as long as MC is still below AC.

Each firm will have a different ​total cost curve. If average costs are constant, the line would
be a straight diagonal line beginning at the origin. When output is 0, fixed costs are equal to
total costs since there are no variable costs. Average costs can be worked out from the total
cost curve: at point A, average costs are C/D whilst at point B, average costs are E/F.




                                                                                                     https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                            https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
Average costs at B are lower than at A, since the gradient of A is steeper than B. The
tangent to the total cost curve is marginal cost.




The relationship between short-run and long-run cost curves:

Short run average cost (SRAC) curves are U-Shaped because of the law of diminishing
returns whilst long run average cost (LRAC) curves are ​U-Shaped because of ​economies
and diseconomies of scale.




                                                                                         https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                         https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                          https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
The LRAC is an ‘​envelope’ for all associated SRAC curves because the LRAC is either
equal to or below the relevant SRAC as shown in the diagram. The firm may initially be set
up to produce a certain amount a day and have enough machinery to do so effectively. They
may become popular and need to produce more than that this amount and in the short run
this will cause a rise in SRAC due to the law of diminishing returns as some factors of
production are fixed. In the long run, all factors become variable and so the SRAC curve can
be shifted. The new SRAC curve will be lower since the firm is able to enjoy economies of
scale. This will continue to occur until the firm begins to experience constant returns to scale
and eventually diseconomies of scale.

   ●   Up until output Q1, the firm experiences economies of scale and so sees falling
       LRAC.
   ●   From output Q1 until output Q2, the firm has constant returns to scale where their
       LRAC are constant
   ●   Any output above Q2 means the firm experiences diseconomies of scale and their
       LRAC rises.

Shifts and movement of the LRAC curve:

   ●   The long run average cost curve is a boundary representing the ​minimum level of
       average costs attainable at any given level of output. Points below the LRAC are
       unattainable and producing above the LRAC is inefficient.

   ●   Movement along the LRAC is due to a ​change in output ​which changes the average
       cost of production due to internal economies/diseconomies of scale. A shift can occur
       due to external economies/diseconomies, taxes or technology, which affects the cost
       of production for a given level of output.




            3.3.3 Economies and diseconomies of scale

Economies of scale are the ​advantages of large scale production ​that enable a large
business to produce at a lower average cost than a smaller business. As a result, the firm is
able to experience ​increasing returns to scale where an increase in inputs by a certain
percentage will lead to a greater percentage increase in output.




                                                                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                            https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
Diseconomies of scale are the ​disadvantages that arise in large businesses that reduce
efficiency and cause average costs to rise. The firm experiences ​decreasing returns to
scale,​ where output increases by a small percentage than inputs.

Constant returns to scale is where firms increase inputs and receive an increase in output
by the same percentage.

The ​minimum efficient scale is the minimum level of output needed for a business to fully
exploit economies of scale. It is the point where the LRAC curve first levels off and when
constant returns to scale is first met.




Internal economies of scale:

An internal economy of scale is an advantage that a firm is able to enjoy because of a
growth in the firm, independent of anything happening to other firms or the industry in
general.

Technical economies: ​These arise as a result of what happens to the production
process.

   ●   Specialisation: Large firms will be able to appoint specialist workers and buy
       specialist machines which will be able to do their jobs more quickly and better than
       machines/workers which are not specialised.

   ●   Balanced teams of machines: Large firms can afford to buy a number of every kind
       of machine for each stage of production. By combining these machines, they can
       ensure they run each machine at its optimal level. Smaller companies may only be




                                                                                              https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                          https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                              https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
      able to afford one machine for each stage and if one stage of production runs faster
      than the other, machines will spend a long time turned off.

  ●   Increased dimensions: This relates to the fact that if you double the size of the
      walls you can increase the area by four times, or if you double the size of a container
      you increase the amount it can carry by more than double. This all occurs without
      doubling the cost.

  ●   Indivisibility of Capital: Some processes require huge items of machinery and
      investment that make it only possible for them to produce on a large scale.

  ●   Research and development: ​Often it is only large firms that can afford to carry out
      large scale research and development, which means they are able to gain a large
      advantage over their competitor.

Financial economies:

  ●   Large firms have greater security because they have more assets and are therefore
      less likely to be forced out of business overnight. As a result, it is easier for them to
      obtain finance and interest rates will be lower due to lower risk. This makes
      investment more accessible.

Risk bearing economies:

  ●   Large companies are able to operate in a range of different markets, producing
      different products which means that if one area of business fails, their whole
      business will not collapse.

Managerial economies:

  ●   Large companies can afford to appoint specialist managers in every field, who are
      specialised and so have greater knowledge and are able to do their job better. Staff
      represent an indivisibility and so small firms cannot employ specialist staff.

Marketing and purchasing economies:

  ●   Buying in bulk: Large firms are able to buy in large numbers so may be able to buy
      their raw materials at a cheaper price than competitors.

  ●   Specialisation: ​Like other areas, businesses can afford to take on specialist buyers
      and sellers who could be more efficient due to the extra time and knowledge.

  ●   Distribution: ​Large firms are able to enjoy preferential rates from transport
      companies because they offer the company a lot of businesses. They will be
      transporting in large batches which means that they will be able to transport in full,
      large transporters which are cheaper per item than half-full or smaller transporters.
      Large businesses can also establish regional distribution centres which enables them
      to reduce transport costs by using large transporters over long distances, storing




                                                                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                          https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
       goods in the distribution centre and using smaller transport to take stock to individual
       shops.



External economies of scale:

An external economy of scale is an advantage which arises from the growth of the industry
within which the firm operates, independent to the firm itself. These cause the LRAC curve to
shift downwards.

Labour​:

   ●   Businesses established in an area with other successful firms from the same industry
       find that ​labour tends to come to that area if they want a job in that industry, for
       example ​Silicon Valley​. This reduces the cost and time take to recruit.

   ●   Another advantage for large industries is that ​local education and training
       providers are more likely to develop courses to prepare people to take up jobs in
       these businesses.

   ●   Firms will be able to hire staff who have been ​trained by other businesses​, which is
       cheaper and more efficient for the firm than training the workers themselves.

Support services:

   ●   Businesses who provide products or services for large businesses will naturally move
       to the area where those businesses are based, which reduces transport cost/time
       delays for the business.



Diseconomies of scale:

Workers:

   ●   In a large business, people can think their efforts go unnoticed and have less chance
       of promotion so lose motivation and work less hard. They can also lose their sense of
       belonging and have less personal commitment and identification with the business.

Geography:

   ●   A firm may have to transport finished products huge distances and firms may find it
       harder to control parts of the business which is miles away.




                                                                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
Change:

   ●   It takes much longer and is much more difficult for a large firm to respond to change.

Prices of materials:

   ●   As business grows so does their demand for raw materials and equipment. Although
       this can increase their bargaining power as they buy in bulk, an increase in demand
       can cause prices to rise and therefore increase production costs. This could also
       occur if the whole industry increases and so firms bid up prices.

Management:

   ●   Coordination and control: As a business grows, it will become progressively more
       difficult to coordinate and keep control of all the different parts of the business.
       Coordination of a multinational company producing different parts of a car around the
       world is much more difficult than coordinating and controlling the work of a local
       garage. This could lead to poorer quality to work and business decisions which don’t
       work well together.

   ●   Communication: ​Within a large business, communication can be slow and also can
       lose accuracy because of the distance and the number of people it has to be passed
       through.




                                                                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                               https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
       3.3.4 Normal profits, supernormal profits and losses
.
Profit is the difference between revenue and costs.

Condition for profit maximisation:

   ●    Profit is maximised when ​TR and TC are furthest apart​, with TR above TC.
   ●    It also occurs when ​MC=MR​: this will always be true because if producing one more
        adds more to revenues than it does to cost (i.e. MR is higher than MC), producing
        that must have increased profit and vice versa. Sometimes, MR and MC may cross
        at two points and thus the profit maximising point is where marginal cost rises as it
        crosses the MR line.



Normal profit, supernormal profit and losses:

   ●    Normal profit is the ​return that is sufficient to keep the factors of production
        committed to the business​. In economics, costs include the level of profit needed
        to keep the producer in the market and to cover the opportunity cost. Therefore, if the
        firm covers its costs it earns normal profit. This is at the point where AC=AR or
        TC=TR.
   ●    If the ​profit is greater than normal profit​, it is earning supernormal, abnormal or
        monopoly. This occurs where AR>AC or TR>TC.
   ●    A loss is where the firm ​fails to cover its costs,​ AR<AC or TR<TC.



Short-run and long-run shut-down points:

   ●    When a business is making a loss, it may not necessarily be the best decision to shut
        down straight away: this ​depends on the average variable cost​.
   ●    If ​AVC<AR then ​firms should continue production​. Each good they make will
        generate more revenue than it cost for them to make it, and so this will help them to
        reduce the size of the loss by covering some of the fixed cost. In this case, they
        should only shut down when their fixed costs increase e.g. when machinery needs to
        be replaced, when their lease is up etc.
   ●    However, if ​AVC>AR then producing more goods will increase the loss. As a result,
        they ​should leave the industry immediately​.
   ●    In the long run, the firm needs to make at least normal profit for them at stay in the
        industry. However, in the short run they should produce as long as their revenue
        covers their variable costs. Hence, the short run shut-down point is where ​AVC=AR​.
   ●    Firms tend to produce on the shut run point even though it does not affect their
        losses as they do not want to let go of their workers or let down customers.




                                                                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                            https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
In the diagram, the business will continue to produce in the short run. If they are profit
maximising, they will produce where MR=MC at the output Q1. This will mean their price is
P1, determined by the AR curve at this level of output, and their costs are C1, determined by
the AC curve. They are making a loss of the shaded area. However, their AVC cost is only
C2 and AR>AVC so they will produce in the short run.




                                                                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                               https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
