Edexcel Economics (A) A-level
Theme 4: A Global Perspective
  4.1 International Economics
               Detailed Notes




       www.pmt.education
                              4.1.1 Globalisation
Characteristics:

  ●   Globalisation refers to the ​growing interdependence of countries and the ​rapid
      rate of change it brings about.
  ●   The OECD defines globalisation as the ‘geographic dispersion of industrial and
      service activities, for example research and development, sourcing of inputs,
      production and distribution and the cross border networking of companies, for
      example through joint ventures and the sharing of assets’.
  ●   It can also be defined as the ​increasing integration of the world’s local, regional
      and national economies into a single international market​.
  ●   There is movement towards free trade of goods and services, free movement of
      labour and capital and free interchange of technology and intellectual capital.



Factors contributing to globalisation:

  ●   Improvements in transport infrastructure and operations have meant there are
      quick, reliable and cheap methods to allow production to be separated around the
      world.
  ●   Improvements in IT and communication allow companies to operate across the
      globe
  ●   Trade liberalisation and reduced protectionism has made it cheaper and more
      feasible to trade; this has been occurring since 1945. The breakdown of the ​soviet
      bloc and the opening of China has shown a whole area of the world for business to
      expand into.
  ●   International financial markets have provided the ability to raise money and move
      money around the world, necessary for international trade.
  ●   TNCs ​(large companies operating around the world) have led to globalisation by
      acting to increase their own profit as they want to take advantage of low labour costs.
      They sell and produce their goods all around the world and have the power to lobby
      governments.



Impacts of globalisation:

Consumers:

  ●   Consumers have more ​choice since there are a wider range of goods available from
      all around the world, not just those produced in the UK.
  ●   It can lead to ​lower prices as firms take advantage of comparative advantage and
      produce in countries with lower costs, for example low labour costs.




                          www.pmt.education
  ●   In other cases, it is leading to a ​rise in prices ​since incomes are rising and so there
      is higher demand for goods and services.
  ●   Many consumers worry about the ​loss of culture​.


Workers:

  ●   In terms of employment, ​some people have gained whilst others have lost. ​There
      have been ​large scale job losses in the western world in manufacturing sectors as
      these jobs have been transferred to countries such as China and Poland.
  ●   Increased migration may affect workers by lowering wages but migrants can also
      provide important skills and an increase in AD which increases the number of jobs.
  ●   International competition has led to a fall in wages (or reduced growth) for low skilled
      workers in developed countries whilst increased those in developing countries.
  ●   The wages for high skilled workers appear to be increasing, since there is more
      demand for their work; this is increasing ​inequality​.
  ●   TNCs tend to provide training for workers and create new jobs.
  ●   Those working in ​sweatshops will see poor conditions and low wages, but this is
      better than other alternatives.


Producers:

  ●   Firms are able to source products from more countries and sell them in more
      countries. This reduces risk since a collapse of the market in one country will have a
      smaller impact on the business.
  ●   They are able to employ low skilled workers much cheaper in developing countries
      and can exploit comparative advantage and have larger markets, both of which
      can increase profits.
  ●   Firms who are unable to compete internationally will lose out.


Government:

  ●   The government may be able to receive ​higher taxes​, since TNCs pay tax and so do
      the people they employ. However, they could lose out through ​tax avoidance​.
  ●   TNCs also have the power to ​bride and lobby governments, which could lead to
      corruption.
  ●   If the government uses the correct policies, they can maximise the gains and
      minimise the losses.


Environment:


  ●   The increase in world production has led to ​increased demand for raw materials​,
      which of which is bad for the environment.
  ●   Increased trade and production has also led to ​more emissions​.




                          www.pmt.education
  ●   However, globalisation means the world can work together to tackle climate change
      and share ideas and technology.


Economic growth:

  ●   Globalisation increases investment within countries; the investment of TNCs
      represents an injection into the economy, and which will have a larger impact due to
      the multiplier. It creates an incentive for countries to make supply-side improvements
      to encourage TNCs to operate in their countries.
  ●   TNCs may bring ​world class management techniques and technology which can
      have knock on benefits to all industries as these techniques and technologies are
      available for them too.
  ●   Trade will increase output since it allows exploitation of comparative advantage.
  ●   However, the power of TNCs can cause ​political instability as they may support
      regimes which are unpopular and undemocratic but that benefit them or could hinder
      regimes which don’t support them
  ●   Comparative cost advantages will change over time and so companies may leave
      the country when it no longer offers an advantage which will cause structural
      unemployment and reduce growth.




                          www.pmt.education
                      4.1.2 Specialisation and trade

Absolute and comparative advantage:

The theory of comparative advantage states ​that countries find specialisation mutually
advantageous if the opportunity costs of production are different​. If they are the same,
there will be no gain from trade. ​Absolute advantage exists when a country can produce a
good more cheaply in absolute terms than another country. ​Comparative advantage ​exists
when a country is able to produce a good more cheaply relative to other goods produced.

Numerical approach:

Example one: In this situation, Spain has an absolute advantage over umbrellas whilst UK
has an absolute advantage over cars (A). If countries didn’t specialise and produced both
(B), they would spend half their time on each. However, if they specialised, they could
produce more. (C)




Example two: ​In this situation, Spain has an absolute advantage in both. However, if they
specialised they can still produce much more. The UK has a comparative advantage in cars
as they are only 1/3 worse at producing cars and ½ as good at producing wine, and so they
should specialise in cars. Spain should put most effort into producing umbrellas (80%) and
produce some cars. This will lead to an increase in total production in both cars and
umbrellas.




                          www.pmt.education
Example three​: ​This is another example of comparative cost advantage. The USA has an
absolute advantage in both but the UK should specialise in cars, since they can produce
50% of the USA output for this but only 1/3 of the vans. The USA could spend 70% of their
time producing vans and 30% producing cars- these numbers are chosen simply because
these allow table C to demonstrate that specialisation produces more than working
independently (B).




The aim of these tables is to prove that specialisation (table C) is better than each country
working individually. The percentages are worked out through method of trial and
improvement.

Diagrammatic approach:




Example one: On top of this, questions can be asked in the context of the PPF. Country 1
has an absolute advantage in both as they can produce more of both. However, trade is not
worthwhile because they have the same opportunity cost since the gradients of the lines are
the same.




                           www.pmt.education
Example two: Country 1 has an absolute advantage in producing good B and country 2 has
absolute advantage in good A. Specialisation is worthwhile since the opportunity cost is
different. This creates the new green PPF, since they maximum they can produce is 200 and
1600. If they produce at a rate of 1:1, they produce on the line but they can produce
anywhere in the area between all three lines, A. Both countries are able to produce beyond
their PFF, which shows both have benefitted from specialisation.




Example three: Country 2 has an absolute advantage in producing both goods, but country
1 has comparative advantage in producing good A. The opportunity cost in the UK of 1 of
good B is 1.5 of good A and the opportunity cost in Italy is 2 of good A. Italy has a
comparative advantage in producing good A; UK in good B.




                          www.pmt.education
Assumptions and limitations of the theory:

   ●   Comparative advantage assumes there are ​no transport costs​, and these could
       lower or prevent any comparative advantage.

   ●   It also assumes ​costs are constants and that there are no economies of scales.
       Economies of scale help to increase the gains from specialisation.

   ●   In the model, goods are assumed to be ​homogenous​, which is unlikely to hold in
       real life. The fact products aren’t homogenous makes it difficult to conclude that a
       country has a comparative advantage as their products can’t be perfectly compared.

   ●   It also assumes that ​factors of production are perfectly mobile​, there are no tariffs
       or other trade barriers and there is perfect knowledge.

   ●   Whether trade takes place will depend on the ​terms of trade​ between the countries.



Advantage and disadvantages of specialisation and trade:

Advantages:

   ●   Comparative advantage shows how ​world output can be increased if countries
       specialise in what they are best at producing, this will increase global economic
       growth.
   ●   Trading and specialising allows countries to benefit from ​economies of scale​, which
       reduces costs and therefore decrease prices globally.
   ●   Different countries have different factors of production and so trade allows
       countries to make use of factors of production, or the things produced by these
       factors, which they otherwise may have been unable to.
   ●   Trade enables consumers to have ​greater choice about the types of goods they
       buy, and so there is greater consumer welfare.
   ●   Trade also means there is ​greater competition​, which provides an incentive to
       innovate. This creates new goods and services and new production methods,
       increasing consumer welfare and lowering costs respectively.
   ●   Countries which isolate themselves for political reasons, like North Korea, have found
       that their economies tend to stagnate.

Disadvantages:

   ●   However, trade can lead to ​over-dependence, where some countries become
       dependent on particular exports whilst others become dependent on particular
       imports. This can cause problems if there are large price falls in the exports of if
       imports are cut for political reasons.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   It can cause ​structural unemployment​, as jobs are lost to foreign firms who are
       more efficient and competitive. The less mobile the workforce, the higher the chance
       that changes in demand due to trade will reduce output and employment over long
       periods of time. ​This is a big problem in the UK as some areas such as Manchester
       suffer from unemployment as their traditional industries declined, for example
       ship-building.
   ●   The ​environment will suffer due to the problems of transport as well as the
       increased demand for resources e.g. deforestation.
   ●   Countries may suffer from a ​loss of sovereignty due to signing international treaties
       and joining trading blocs, for example in the ​EU​.
   ●   They may see a ​loss of culture as trade brings foreign ideas and products to the
       country.




                              4.1.3 Pattern of trade
The UK used to be the ‘workshop of the world’, exporting huge amounts of goods but the
1970s and 1980s saw a process of deindustrialisation with exports of services becoming
increasingly important. The UK’s entry to the EU led to an increase in trade with Europe.



Factors influencing the pattern of trade:

   ●   Comparative advantage: ​Countries will trade where there is a comparative
       advantage to trading. A change in the comparative advantage will affect the trade
       pattern. There has been a recent growth in the exports of manufactured goods from
       developing countries to developed countries. This is because developing countries
       have gained an advantage in the production of manufactured goods, due to their
       lower labour costs, so production shifted abroad. The ​deindustrialisation of countries
       such as the UK has meant the manufacturing sector has declined. This means that
       production o​f manufactured goods has shifted to other countries​, such as China,
       whilst the UK now focuses more on services, such as finance. This has led to the
       industrialisation of China and India. Their share of world trade has risen and the
       volume of manufactured goods that they export has increased. However, since
       China’s population is now ageing, their wage competitiveness has fallen. This is also
       due to the rise of the middle class in China, who demand higher wages and consume
       more.

   ●   Emerging economies: Countries grow at different rates and when they grow, they
       are likely to need to import more goods and services than before as well as exporting
       more to pay for this. Emerging economies shift the trade pattern by taking up a larger
       proportion of a country’s imports and exports than they had previously. One example
       of this is ​China. International trade is arguably more important for developing
       countries than developed countries: it contributes towards ​20% of LDC economies




                           www.pmt.education
       compared to 8% of the US economy. The ​collapse of communism has meant that
       more countries, especially developing countries, are participating in world trade.

   ●   Trading blocs and bilateral trading agreements: ​These increase the level of
       trade between certain countries and so influence the pattern of trade because trade
       increases between these countries and decreases between others. ​Joining the EU
       meant that the UK traded a lot more with European countries than previously, and
       less with countries outside the EU.

   ●   Relative exchange rates: ​The exchange rate affects the relative prices of goods
       between countries. Prices are an important factor in determining whether consumers
       buy goods and so a change in price will affect the pattern of trade. It can be argued
       that the ​UK’s trade deficit with Europe is due to the strength of the pound. ​China
       have kept their currency weak in order to increase their trade surplus by making
       exports more competitive.




                               4.1.4 Terms of trade
The terms of trade measures the ​rate of exchange of one product for another when two
countries trade. It tells us the quantity of exports that need to be sold in order to purchase a
given level of imports.
Movement in the terms of trades is said to be ​favourable if the terms of trade increase as
the country can buy more imports with the same level of exports. This is called an
improvement in the terms of trade. It is ​unfavourable ​if they decrease, when export prices
fall or import prices rise. This is called a ​deterioration​.



Calculation of terms of trade:

It is measured in the form of an index because it is calculated from the weighted average of
thousands of different export and import prices e.g. changes in the price of oil have larger
impacts on the terms of trade than changes in the price of a Rolls Royce.


(average export price index/average import price index) x100



Factors influencing a country’s terms of trade:

   ●   An improvement in the terms of trade will be caused by a rise in export prices or a fall
       in import prices. A deterioration will be caused by a fall in export prices or a rise in
       import prices.




                            www.pmt.education
  ●   In the short run, ​exchange rates, inflation and changes in demand/supply of
      imports or exports ​affect the terms of trade since these affect the relative prices of
      imports and exports.

  ●   In the long run, an ​improvement in productivity ​compared to a country’s main
      trading partners will decrease the terms of trade since export prices will fall relative to
      import prices. This can be caused by new technology, more efficient labour etc.

  ●   Another long run factor is changing incomes. ​This affects the pattern of demand for
      goods and services. For example, a rise in world income causes a rise in demand for
      tourism and so a country with a strong tourist industry, such as Spain, may see a rise
      in prices in that industry and hence an increase in their terms of trade. The
      Prebisch-Singer hypothesis suggests the long run price of primary goods declines in
      proportion to manufactured goods, which means those dependent on primary exports
      will see a fall in their terms of trade.

  ●   In general, ​anything which affects the price of a country’s imports or exports
      will affect its terms of trade.



Impacts of changes:

  ●   If PED of exports and imports is inelastic, a favourable movement in terms of trade
      would improve the current account on the ​balance of payments ​whilst if it is elastic,
      a favourable movement would worsen the current account.

  ●   An ​improvement in the terms of trade is likely to lead to a fall in GDP and a rise
      in unemployment, since if it is caused by a rise in export prices, exports will fall and if
      it is caused by a fall in import prices, imports will rise. Both of these causes a
      reduction in production within the country and so a fall in jobs and output. However, a
      long term decline in the terms of trade suggests a long term decline in living
      standards​ as less imports can be bought.

  ●   It is important to look at the cause of the change. If an improvement has occured due
      to increased demand for exports, then this will be beneficial for the country. If a
      deterioration is caused by an improvement in international competitiveness, this will
      also be beneficial. The ​export and import revenues are more important than the
      price alone. For an improvement to be beneficial, export revenues must increase.




                           www.pmt.education
    4.1.5 Trading blocs and the World Trade Organisation

Types of trading blocs:
A regional trading bloc is a group of countries within a geographical region that protect
themselves from imports from non-members. They sign an agreement to reduce or eliminate
tariffs, quotas and other protectionist barriers among themselves. They are a form of
integration. Examples include ​NAFTA (North America), the ​EU​, ​ASEAN (Asia) and
MERCOSUR (South America). Most regional trade agreements take the form of ​bilateral
agreements​, between one single country and another single country. Some agreements are
multilateral or plurilateral agreements, between at least three countries.

   ●   Preferential trading areas (PTA): ​These are where tariff and other trade barriers
       are reduced on some but not all goods traded between member countries.

   ●   Free trade areas (FTA): ​These occur when two or more countries in a region
       agree to reduce or eliminate trade barriers on all goods coming from other members.
       Each member is able to impose its own tariffs and quotas on goods it imports from
       outside the trading bloc.

   ●   Customs unions: ​A customs union involves the removal of tariff barriers between
       members and the acceptance of a common external tariff against non-members. This
       means that members may negotiate as a single bloc with third parties such as other
       trading blocs or countries.

   ●   Common markets: ​This is the first step towards full economic integration and
       occurs when members trade freely in all economic resources so barriers to trade in
       goods, services, capital and labour are removed. They impose a common external
       tariff on imported goods from outside the markets. For a common market to be
       successful there must also be a significant level of harmonisation of micro-economic
       policies, common rules regarding monopoly power and anti-competitive practices and
       the removal of custom posts. There may also be common policies affecting key
       industries such as the ​Common Agricultural Policy ​(CAP). The main goal of a
       common market is to establish a single market, the same way in which there is a
       single market within an individual economy.

   ●   Monetary unions: ​These are two or more countries with a single currency, with an
       exchange rate that is monitored and controlled by one central bank or several central
       banks with closely coordinated monetary policy. Some examples include the EU, the
       West African Economic and Monetary Union and the Economic and Monetary
       Community of Central Africa.




                           www.pmt.education
       The Eurozone:
          o T​he European Central Bank distributes notes and coins, sets interest rates,
             maintains a stable financial situation and manages the foreign currency
             reserves.
          o In the EU, the governments agreed not to exceed a fiscal deficit of more than
             3% and not to have a National Debt of more than 60%.
          o For a monetary union to be successful, there should be free movement of
             labour, capital mobility and wage and price flexibility, fiscal transfers from one
             country to another when a country is performing poorly, and countries should
             share the same business cycle. The main problem for the EU is the lack of
             automatic fiscal transfers, for example these would have helped Greece,
             Spain and Portugal following the financial crisis of 2007-08.

       Monetary unions are good since they mean prices are fixed as all currencies are the
same and there are reduced exchange rate costs. It becomes easier for prices to be
compared across the union and so MNCs are less able to price discriminate.
       However, there are financial costs involved with starting the new currency and there
would be costs if the union broke up. There is a loss of policy independence, countries are
unable to change the value of their currency and what is good for one country may not be
good for another.

   ●   An ​economic union ​is the final step of economic integration. There will be a
       common market with coordination of social, fiscal and monetary policy.



Costs and benefits:

Advantages:

There are two main types of benefits: static benefits from the gains of specialisation, and
dynamic benefits from increased competition and the transfer of resources.

   ●   Free trade encourages increased specialisation, and this increases output, according
       to ​comparative advantage​. This specialisation also helps firms to benefit from
       economies of scale​, causing lower prices and costs, a dynamic advantage.
   ●   Firms may be able to grow much larger by creating a ​larger customer market​, but
       this may be difficult given different customer markets in different countries. It will be
       easier for some products, such as basic chemicals and cars, than for other products
       and easier between some countries, such as France and the UK, than between
       others, such as Iran and UK. Economies of scale will be increased further over time
       as companies expand.
   ●   Firms inside the bloc are protected from cheaper imports from outside, for example
       those in the EU are protected from Chinese imports.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   Another dynamic benefit may be ​competition, as the removal of barriers means
       domestic industries face greater competition. This encourages innovation and lower
       prices, leading to improvements in productive and allocative efficiency.
   ●   The increased trade may ​create more jobs​ if it leads to an increase in output.
   ●   There will be ​increased choice ​for consumers.

Disadvantages:

   ●   Countries are no longer able to benefit from trade with countries in other blocs and
       the blocs are likely to ​distort world trade​, reducing the benefits of specialisation.
       Inefficient producers within the bloc are protected from efficient producers outside the
       bloc, called ​trade diversion​.
   ●   There may be a ​reduction in competition as inefficient firms are driven out of the
       business and the market becomes oligopolistic.
   ●   One dynamic loss may be the ​loss of resources​, as the most successful countries
       will attract capital and labour (since both are free in a common market) and so this
       heightens regional inequalities as the richest countries experience faster rates of
       growth. Firms may set up factories etc. in the poorer countries, as labour is cheaper,
       and therefore this will help them to grow but will also mean that they lose the most
       skilled labourers to more successful countries as this is where the best jobs are
       based.
   ●   There could also be ​retaliation as the creation of one regional trading bloc will lead
       to the creation of others and this can lead to trade disputes.
   ●   Creating and maintain trading blocs can ​distract governments from the gains of
       signing full free trade agreements​. Bilateral trade agreements can bring very little
       gain to the two countries making the agreement but can take up significant
       government resources.
   ●   They ​distribute the gains from trade unequally​, with developed countries often
       gaining most and developing countries being impacted little.
   ●   They may be weak if they cover a very ​limited range of goods​.
   ●   They lessen ​national sovereignty​.
   ●   Trading blocs can be seen as ‘​second best’ solutions in a world with protectionism.
       Economic efficiency would be maximised if there were no barriers to trade




Trade creation and diversion: ​The costs and benefits of trading blocs will depend on
whether they lead to trade creation or trade diversion. Trade creation is when a country
moves from buying goods from a high cost to a lower cost country, whilst trade diversion is
when they go from low cost to a higher cost.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   Trade creation is when trade is created by the joining of a trade union. The diagram
       is the opposite of the tariff diagram, since it removes the tariffs and leads to welfare
       gain and higher consumer surplus. It is when consumption shifts from a ​high cost
       domestic producer to a low cost partner producer​, so for example when
       consumption of wine shifted from domestic producers to efficient French producers
       when we joined the EU.

   ●   However, trade diversion occurs where consumption shifts from a ​lower cost
       producer outside the trading bloc to a higher cost producer within it. One
       example could be the ​UK switching from buying New Zealand butter, which is the
       cheapest, to European butter when they joined the EU:
          o Before, there would have been the same tariff on both New Zealand and
             European butter so New Zealand butter would have been bought since it is
             produced more efficiently and therefore is cheaper.
          o However, joining the EU meant that the tariff on EU butter was removed and
             so this became cheaper and consumption was switched to the higher cost EU
             butter. This reduces world-wide efficiency as countries are not buying from
             the most cost-effective supplier and therefore not fully utilising comparative
             advantage.
          o For the UK, there will be both gains and losses.




The diagram shows how the UK will buy from the EU without tariffs, rather than New Zealand
with tariffs. They will buy Q2-Q1 from the EU. Before, they would have bought Q3-Q4 from
New Zealand and gained tax revenue of C+E. The EU producers are gain E in profit, whilst
C is switched to consumer surplus. A is producer surplus being switched to consumer
surplus and B and D are welfare gain given to consumers. If B+D are greater than E, the UK
have gained whilst if they are smaller, the UK has lost out.




                           www.pmt.education
  ●   A trading bloc is more likely to lead to trade diversion than trade creation when it has
      a very ​high external tariff as this will push countries to buy from within the bloc or if
      there is a ​relatively small cost difference between goods purchased within and
      outside the block. The higher the tariffs imposed by a country before joining the
      market, the more likely it is that trade creation rather than diversion will take place.

  ●   If joining a FTA leads to more trade creation than diversion, it is ​welfare improving​.
      If it leads to more diversion than creation, the FTA is ​reducing welfare​.



Role of the WTO:

  ●   The World Trade Organisation was set up in 1995 to replace the GATT, which had
      aimed to reduce protectionism. It has two main aims: to bring about ​trade
      liberalisation and to ensure countries ​act according to the trade agreements they
      have signed.

  ●   If a country fails to follow its agreements, a country or group can file a ​complaint and
      the WTO will attempt to solve the issue through negotiations but the complaint can go
      to a panel of experts and countries must agree to their rulings. If they reject the
      ruling, the country which wins the ruling has the legal right to impose ​trade
      sanctions against the exports of the losing country. One example of a WTO ruling is
      Boeing being allowed to impose tariffs on Airbus for illegal subsidies in Europe in
      2018.

  ●   They hold a series of talks called ​‘rounds’, the most recent of these is the Doha
      Round in 2001 which aims to cut protectionism on agricultural goods, reduce tariffs
      on manufacturing goods, increase access to markets in services, tighten intellectual
      property rights and give the WTO more power to settle disputes.

  ●   One problem is that for any agreement to take place, ​all countries must agree to it
      and so any country is able to veto an agreement. This veto may also be politically
      motivated, for example retaliation against the US for something unrelated.



Possible conflicts with the WTO:

  ●   Regional trade agreements contradict WTO’s principles as a common external
      tariff on trade outside the trading bloc introduces protectionism. Customs unions and
      free trade areas can be seen as violating the WTO’s principle since not all trading
      partners are treated equally.

  ●   However, they can ​complement the trading system and the WTO strives to ensure
      non-members can trade freely and easily with members of a trade bloc.




                           www.pmt.education
  ●   Some might argue the WTO is ​too powerfu​l or that it ​ignores the developing
      countries​, as developed countries do not trade freely with developing countries.

  ●   The ​protectionist approach of the USA and China currently provides a threat to the
      WTO system.




                     4.1.6 Restrictions on free trade
Reasons for restrictions:

  ●   Infant industry argument: ​An infant industry is one that is just being established
      within a country. They need to be able to build up a reputation and customer base
      and will have to cover a lot of sunk costs, meaning their AC will be higher. Therefore,
      the industry would be unable to compete in the international market and so the
      government protect them until they are able to compete on an equal level. This has
      worked well in ​Japan but in general tends to be ineffective as firms grow to be
      inefficient and the government tend to have a poor record of ‘picking winners’. There
      may be other more effective methods, such as subsidies.


  ●   Job protection: ​Governments may be concerned that allowing imports will mean
      domestic producers will lose out to international firms, and so there will be job losses
      within the country. Not only would this have negative economic consequences, it
      would be politically unpopular.

  ●   Protection from potential dumping: ​Dumping is when a country or company
      with surplus goods sells these goods off to other areas of the world at very low
      prices, harming domestic producers in those countries. The government may need to
      intervene to protect domestic producers who are unable to compete with firms that
      are willing to make a loss. In ​China, tariffs are placed on stainless steel tubes from
      the EU and Japan to prevent from dumping.

  ●   Protection from unfair competition: ​Across the world, different rules apply and
      this means that producers in different countries can produce at different prices.
      Domestic producers may be unable to compete with a firm that has very low labour
      costs or very low health and safety costs due to regulation or with a firm that is
      heavily subsidised by the government. Some will argue the government should
      intervene to protect domestic producers from this.

  ●   Terms of trade: ​If a country buys a large amount of imports for a certain good, this
      will increase demand for that good and hence increase the price. This will worsen the
      terms of trade and so therefore they can buy less imports with the amount of exports.
      Restrictions will reduce supply of the good and lead to a fall in the price received by
      the importer, so improve the terms of trade.




                          www.pmt.education
   ●   Danger of over specialisation: ​Some people believe that no country should
       become totally reliant on another for important products or materials and so it is
       important to introduce protectionism on these goods to prevent firms and consumers
       becoming reliant on them.

   ●   There are some other arguments. Sometimes countries may decide to place controls
       on ‘dangerous’ goods, such as unsafe electrical items or drugs. They may feel too
       dependent on one industry so introduce barriers to allow others to develop. They not
       want to become too dependent on another country for something. ​Many of the tariffs
       imposed by Donald Trump in in 2018 were on the basis of national security.




Types of restrictions:



Types of restrictions:

Tariffs:

These are ​taxes placed on imported goods which make them more expensive to buy,
making people more likely to buy domestic goods.




Price is set at P​1 because of the interaction of demand and supply in the world market. This
means domestic producers will produce Q1 whilst consumers will demand Q2. Hence, the
country will import Q​2​-Q​1 goods meaning that Q1ABQ2 will  ​    be spent buying imports.
However, the government could introduce a tariff and so price rises to P2​. This
                                                                            ​    will mean that




                            www.pmt.education
firms produce Q3 and consumers want Q4, so this time only Q3NMQ4 will be spent on
imports. The government will also raise revenue of KLMN, the shaded area. However,
consumer surplus falls from BP1C to LP2C: KLMN goes to the government and KAP1P2
goes to the producer but the areas X and Y are deadweight loss. Therefore, although tariffs
help home producers, raise revenue and reduce the money leaving in imports, they are
inefficient as they cause deadweight loss.

Quotas:

These are ​limits placed on the level of imports allowed into a country​, meaning people
are forced to buy domestic goods if they want that good and the quota is already used up.
Like tariffs, a diagram can be used to represent how the imposition of a quota leads to
welfare loss. The government could introduce a quota of KL (in the above diagram) and this
will have the same effect as introducing a tariff which raises price to P​2​. There will be a
welfare loss and shift of consumer subsidy to producer subsidy but instead of tax revenue,
there will be extra revenue for the exporting, foreign firms.

Subsidies to domestic products:

These are ​payments to domestic producers which lower their costs and help them to be
more competitive by enabling cheaper prices. Sometimes subsidies are purely given to
goods that are exported whilst other times they are given to firms that have a large
proportion of their sales as exports. Subsidies can also be given to domestic firms that
compete with imports, usually in the form of indirect subsidies like tax breaks or cheap loans.
Research and development subsidies will help the firm to be competitive by ensuring they
have the most up to date technologies. One example of this is ​China, who subsidise their car
industry.

Non-tariff barriers:

   ●   Countries can introduce an ​embargo​, which is a total ban on imported goods.
   ●   They can introduce ​import licensing when countries/firms need a license to be able
       to import; by reducing the number of licenses they give out, the government can
       restrict the level of imports.
   ●   The use of ​legal and technical standards means that some products cannot be
       sold in the country, for example specific specifications can be imposed for goods or
       intellectual property laws over patents and copyrights can be introduced. The ​EU has
       high standards, which is the main restriction on trade from outside the bloc.
   ●   On top of this, countries can use ​voluntary export restraint agreements where they
       agree to limit the volume of exports to one another over an agreed period of time to
       allow domestic producers to grow and establish.




                            www.pmt.education
Impact of protectionist policies:

Consumers:

   ●   There are ​higher prices for consumers as they are unable to buy imports at the
       cheaper price. It tends to raise the price of domestic producers since goods and
       services needed for the production of these goods may also suffer from import
       controls and it limits the competition for domestic producers so they have less
       incentive to be efficient.
   ●   Moreover, they suffer from ​less choice.


Producers:
   ●   Domestic producers tend to benefit from import controls since they have less
       competition so can sell ​more goods at a higher price than otherwise and they will
       benefit from measures to increased exports.
   ●   However, they may suffer from higher costs if there are ​controls on the imports
       they need for production​.
   ●   Foreign producers will lose out as they are limited in where they can sell their
       goods. Inefficient, domestic producers are kept in production, whilst efficient, foreign
       ones lose out.


Workers:

   ●   Evidence suggests that there is ​little difference to employment figures​.
   ●   It can be argued that allowing inefficient firms to close would be better for workers in
       the long run. The market would reallocate resources and ​create new jobs, with
       greater security.
   ●   Following the steel tariffs imposed in America in 2018, it is estimated that 16 jobs will
       be lost elsewhere for every job gained in the steel industry.​ (The Economist)
   ●   However, ​Argentina​ have been successful at implementing tariffs which protect jobs


Governments:

   ●   In the short run, governments benefit from protectionist policies as they can gain
       tariff revenues​ and they are ​politically popular​.
   ●   However, it can lead to an ​inefficient economy ​which stifles growth.


Living standards:

   ●   As the tariff diagram shows, the imposition of import controls results in ​deadweight
       welfare loss.
   ●   It also causes trade wars since the introduction of restrictions often leads to
       retaliation ​by other countries. A recent example of this is the ​US-China trade war​,




                           www.pmt.education
       where each country continues to impose more tariffs on the other’s goods. This
       causes a reduction in trade and a reduction in growth

Equity:

   ●   It has a ​regressive effect on the distribution of income as the rise in price affects the
       poorer members of society far more than the well off as it is they are no longer able
       to afford the products.

Recently, there has been a rise of economic nationalism in a number of countries, leading to
policies which emphasise the domestic control of the economy, labour and capital formation,
one of these is restrictions to free trade. The financial crisis and recession led to distrust of
globalisation and pressure to put self-interest above anything else. Countries have found it
difficult to lower protectionism since they always expect reciprocity, for example the UK
would not lower barriers on US goods if they US were not willing to do the same.




                          4.1.7 Balance of payments
Components of the balance of payment:

A country who participates in foreign trade will be sending and receiving money from other
countries and they keep track of these transactions in a balance sheet, called the balance of
payments:

   ●   The current account: The current account itself is split into different parts: trade in
       goods, trade in services and income and current transfers. It is looked at in detail in
       Theme 2.

   ●   The capital and financial accounts:
          o The capital account is relatively unimportant as it mainly records transfers of
             immigrants and emigrants taking money abroad or bringing to the UK, or
             government transfers such as debt forgiveness to Third World countries.
          o The financial account is more important and is split into three main parts:
             foreign direct investment (FDI), portfolio investment and other investments.
             Foreign direct investment is the flow of money to purchase part of a foreign
             firm (10% of more of the ordinary shares) e.g. BT buying a 15% share in a
             telecommunications company in Brazil. Portfolio investments are the same




                            www.pmt.education
               thing but where they buy less than 10% of the company. Other investments
               include loans, purchasing of currency and bank deposits.

   ●   The balance of payments shows all flows into and out of the country and since total
       inflows must equal total outflows, the balance of payments must balance. If there is a
       recorded deficit or surplus, this is a ​balancing item​, all the transactions that fail to be
       recorded by the statisticians.



Causes of deficits and surpluses:

There can be deficits and surpluses on particular part of the accounts; a country can run a
deficit on the current account if they are able to have a surplus on the capital account.
France and Chile tend to have a current account balance​, ​China and Germany tend to have
a current account surplus​ and ​Britain and the USA tend to have a current account deficit.

Short term causes:

   ●   It can be caused by ​high levels of consumer demand​. If real household spending
       grows more quickly than the supply side of the economy can deliver, the only way of
       meeting this demand is by importing those goods and services. High incomes in a
       country lead to high imports but have no effect on the level of exports.




The diagram shows that an increase in income from Y1 to Y2 causes imports to rise but
exports to stay constant, leading to a fall in the balance of trade. At Y1, imports=exports and
so the balance of trade is 0 whilst at Y2, there is a balance of trade deficit. Research
suggests that UK consumers have a ​high-income elasticity of demand for imports so the
deficit tends to grow when the economy enjoys a period of consumption led growth.

   ●   Moreover, it can be caused by a ​strong exchange rate which reduces the UK price
       of imports and leads to an expenditure-switching effect away from domestically
       produced output. The high value of the pound improves the terms of trade between
       the UK and other countries, allowing us to buy and consume more imports with each




                            www.pmt.education
       pound. It increases the price of exports and so leads to a fall in the value of exports.
       This assumes that PED is inelastic.

   ●   A high level of ​relative ​inflation ​will decrease exports since it will increase their price
       compared to goods produced by other countries.


Medium term causes:

   ●   As a country loses its ​comparative advantage​, people will transfer their purchases
       to other countries and the UK will need to switch resources to production of other
       things. Similarly, the growth of ​cheap imports from countries like China ​has caused a
       substitution effect.


Long term causes: ​Much of the ​UK’s trade deficit is due to structural rather than cyclical
factors, due to supply side deficiencies.


   ●   A ​lack of capital investment means firms use older and more out of date
       technology. This contributes to a ​lack of productivity. Germany has ​35% higher
       productivity per hour worked than the UK. In the UK, ​productivity is only growing at
       1%​.

   ●   Deindustrialisation in the UK has led to a decrease in the relative importance of
       industry and manufacturing in the economy. This makes it more difficult to export,
       since services are harder to export.

   ●   Countries with a large amount of ​natural resources tend to export more, and if they
       also have a small population (​e.g. Saudi Arabia​) then they tend to have a current
       account surplus.

   ●   Some countries are ​more competitive than others, for example high labour
       productivity or a reputation for high quality.

   ●   Countries with ​corruption ​and where it is difficult to set up a business tend to find it
       difficult to export.

In the context of the UK, the main issues are low levels of investment, the impact of the
banking crisis on preventing borrowing, low innovation, skills shortages, inefficient
monopolies and underperforming businesses and poor infrastructure.




                             www.pmt.education
Reducing imbalance:

There are two main causes of deficit: demand side issues and supply side issues. This
means there are two main ways to fix it: demand and supply side policies.
Expenditure-switching policies can also be used.

Demand side policies​:

   ●   Monetary or fiscal policy can be used to reduce AD. This reduces income so reduces
       demand for imports. It should be effective since there is high income elasticity for
       imports.

However, they are only ​short term and ​limit output of the economy, causing a reduction in
living standards and growth.

Supply side policies:

   ●   They could also use a range of measures to improve ​productivity and efficiency or
       improve ​quality. This could include competition policy, improving labour or improving
       infrastructure.

   ●   They can seek and encourage industries to ​exploit opportunities in export market
       overseas and focus resources on industries where the UK has a ​real comparative
       advantage​, accepting some industries should close. This will be politically unpopular
       and will cause job losses in the short term.

These are much ​longer-term solutions but will solve the balance of payment issues in the
long term rather than temporarily as with aggregate demand.
Expenditure switching policies:

   ●   Tariffs or quotas will reduce the attractiveness of imports. However, they are likely
       to cause ​trade wars as other countries implement protectionist policies and so
       therefore may even worsen the deficit. These are almost impossible to implement,
       given trading blocs and the laws of the WTO.

   ●   They could attempt to ​control inflation which will mean that the price of British
       goods rises slower than those in other countries, meaning that they become more
       competitive over time. The problem is that it will lead to a fall in demand for domestic
       goods and so therefore could cause unemployment and a fall in growth.

   ●   They could also ​devalue/depreciate the pound as this will makes exports cheaper
       and imports dearer. However, this will not always work. (​Marshall-Lerner and
       J-Curve​). It is not feasible for many countries as they have a ​floating exchange rate
       and so central banks intervening in the market will only nudge the exchange rate for




                           www.pmt.education
       a short period of time. The best way to affect the value of the currency is by changing
       the interest rate, but this has effects on AD and so may not have the intended effect.

These ​cannot solve long-term​ causes of a deficit.




Significance of global trade imbalances:

   ●   Some can argue that a current account imbalance is not much of a problem as long
       as the capital and financial account is in surplus. However, the financial crisis of 2008
       dramatically reduced the amount of capital flowing around the global economy and
       showed how quickly the position of the capital account can change. The uncertainty
       around Brexit increased the concern about the balance of payments due to fears
       over the response of the financial markets.

   ●   Since the late 1990s, there have been concerns about global imbalances which can
       be measured in two ways: imbalances on the current account and imbalances in
       assets owned abroad or borrowing owned abroad. The two are linked since if a
       country has a constant surplus, then it will tend to build up a stock of assets abroad
       whilst if they have a constant deficit, they will owe more and more to foreign creditors.
       This may become an issue if imbalances are large.

   ●   Problems arise if foreign investors refuse to lend to a ‘country’- but it is an individual
       or institution which takes the loan and not the country. If they refuse to lend to a bank
       or the government, this will have much larger impacts than if they refuse to lend to a
       firm or individual.

   ●   Today, deficits are less of a concern to countries: the ​US and UK have no problem
       financing their deficits and borrowing has not built up unsustainable debts.

   ●   Current account imbalances become a problem when governments can’t repay their
       foreign currency debts.

   ●   Countries with large deficits are seen as having a problem, whilst those with large
       surpluses are seen as being successful but in reality, those with surplus cause just as
       much instability as those with deficits.

   ●   Current account surpluses cause losses for citizens in a country who don’t see the
       high living standards which they could enjoy from consuming more.




                            www.pmt.education
                             4.1.8 Exchange rates
The exchange rate is the ​purchasing power of a currency in terms of what it can buy of
other currencies​.




Exchange rate systems:

   ●   A ​free floating system is where the value of the currency is determined purely by
       market demand and supply of the currency, with no target set by the government and
       no official intervention in the currency markets. Both trade flows and capital flows
       affect the exchange rate under a floating system. Most systems are floating, including
       the ​UK.




   ●   Managed floating is where the value of the currency is determined by demand and
       supply but the Central Bank will try to prevent large changes in the exchange rate on




                           www.pmt.education
      a day to day basis. This is done by buying and selling currency and by changing
      interest rates. Some examples include the ​Brazilian Real, Swiss Franc and the
      Japanese Yen​.
          o An adjustable peg system is where currencies are fixed against another but
              the level at which they are fixed can be changed.
          o Crawling peg systems are a form of this but have a mechanism which allows
              the value to change.
          o Managed float or dirty float is where the government intervenes to improve
              macroeconomic stability.

  ●   A ​fixed system is when a government sets their currency against another and that
      exchange rate does not change. The country can decide to devalue its currency
      overnight to improve international competitiveness of its industry. One example was
      the ​gold standard​, where each major trading country made its currency convertible
      into gold at a fixed rate. Today, no country uses the gold standard.




Changes in the currency:

  ●   An ​appreciation of the currency is an increase in the value of the currency using
      floating exchange rates, whilst ​depreciation is a fall in the value of the currency
      under floating exchange rates.

  ●   A revaluation of the currency is when the currency is increased against the value of
      another under a fixed system, whilst ​devaluation of the currency is a decrease in the
      value of one currency against another under a fixed system.




                          www.pmt.education
Factors affecting floating exchange rates:

   ●   Floating exchange rates are determined by the ​interaction of demand and supply​,
       and so are affected by changes in demand and supply.

   ●   The ​demand for pounds is determined by​: the amount of British goods that
       foreigners want to buy; the number of foreigners wanting to invest in the UK, visit the
       UK or place their money in British banks; and the amount of speculation on the
       pound.

   ●   The ​supply of pounds is determined by: the amount of foreign goods people in the
       UK want to buy; the number of British firms that want to invest abroad, the amount of
       British people wanting to go on holiday abroad or place their money in foreign banks;
       and the amount of speculation on the pound.

   ●   Therefore, in general, the currency is affected by the level of ​exports and imports​,
       the level of ​investment,​ those going on ​holiday​ and ​speculation.

   ●   Speculation is the single most important determinant of the short-term price- if
       speculators fear a fall in the pound, the pound will fall as they will sell their pounds
       and buy another currency.

   ●   However, in the long term, the currency is determined by ​economic fundamentals​:
       exports, imports and long-term capital flows.




Government intervention:

There are two main methods the government can use to influence the value of their country:


   ●   If they want to increase or decrease demand for their currency, a government can
       use interest rates. ​An increase in interest rates will strengthen the pound as people
       will convert their money to pounds to put them in English banks, so demand for
       pounds will rise. Falls in interest rates will decrease demand for the pound so weaken
       the currency.

   ●   Also, governments can use ​gold and foreign currency reserves ​to manipulate the
       value of their currency. If the value of the pound is too high and they want to weaken
       it, they can increase supply by buying foreign currency or gold with pounds. To




                           www.pmt.education
       strengthen the pound, they can increase demand by selling their foreign currency or
       gold in exchange for pounds. Central banks have found that this method tends to
       have little impact on currencies in the long term. They are also able to limit supply of
       currency by introducing currency controls, and by doing so they can fix the value of
       the currency.


Competitive devaluation/depreciation:


   ●   This is where a country ​deliberately intervenes in foreign exchange markets to
       drive down the value of their currency to provide a competitive boost to their
       exporting industries. A weaker currency will encourage exports and discourage
       imports and therefore the balance of payments should improve assuming the
       Marshall-Lerner condition. However, the problem is that this can cause inflation and
       this may reduce competitiveness, leading to a fall in the balance of payments.

   ●   One problem is that ​other countries may follow and reduce their currency as well.
       This is unlikely if there is a current account deficit but if the country who devalues has
       a surplus, other countries are likely to retaliate.



Impact of changes in exchange rates:

   ●   Current account of balance of payments:
          o   The ​Marshall-Lerner condition states that the sum of the price elasticities of
              imports and exports must be more than one (i.e. elastic) if a currency
              devaluation is to have a positive impact on the trade balance.
          o   The ​J-curve​ (shown in the diagram) shows how the current account will
              worsen before it improves. People will not immediately recognise that British
              exports are cheaper and it will take a while to find a source for them, whilst
              UK consumers will not see that imports are more expensive and may be
              unable to switch straight away. Demand tends to be inelastic in the short run.
              Therefore, the amount sold of each will stay the same but the price of exports
              will fall, so the value will fall, and the price of imports will rise, so the value will
              rise. However, in the long term, the current account deficit will fall as demand
              becomes more elastic.




                            www.pmt.education
   ●   Economic growth and unemployment: ​A weaker exchange rate is likely to
       increase exports, since they become cheaper, and decrease imports so lead to an
       increase in AD. This will increase employment and economic growth.

   ●   Rate of inflation: ​Falls in the exchange rate will increase inflation as imports
       become more expensive, causing a rise in prices and a fall in SRAS. Also, the net
       exports section of AD will increase and so inflation will rise further.

   ●   FDI: ​A fall in the currency may increase FDI because it becomes cheaper to invest.
       However, if the currency is continuing to fall then this is an indication that an
       economy has serious economic difficulties which will discourage investment.

Following a depreciation of a currency, companies may decide to keep the price it charges
its customers the same. For example, the pound may fall but a UK company selling goods in
the US may decide to charge the same price in US dollars to its customers- this means the
value of the exports in British pounds has risen. Therefore, changes in currencies will have
different impacts depending on the reactions of firms.




                           www.pmt.education
                   4.1.9 International competitiveness

The lower the level of international competitiveness, the more likely that the country will face
a current account deficit. For goods to be competitive internationally, they need to be cheap,
have good quality, design or after-sales and good marketing.


Measures of international competitiveness:

Relative unit labour costs: ​Unit labour costs are total wages divided by real output: the
cost of employing workers for each unit of good. These are measured in an index number
with one year chosen as a base year. Unit labour costs in the UK are compared to other
countries. A rise in relative unit labour costs in the UK shows that labour cost per unit is
rising faster in the UK compared to other countries and so the UK is becoming less
competitive.

Relative export prices: This is the price of UK exports compared to the exports of the
UK’s main trading partners. A rise in relative export prices means UK export prices have
risen more than other countries’ export prices and so the UK has become less competitive.



Factors influencing international competitiveness:

   ●   Exchange rates​: ​A rise in the pound will cause exports to become more expensive,
       and thus make UK goods less competitive as their price changes. However, this
       depends on the elasticity the good and the reaction of the firms as explained in 4.1.8.

   ●   Productivity: A rise in productivity will cause a rise in the UK’s competitiveness
       because costs are lower and so prices will fall. Labour productivity is important.

   ●   Regulation​: High levels of regulation slow down business decisions, making them
       less adaptable to changes in the global market. It also increases their cost of
       production. Therefore, regulation reduces competitiveness because of higher costs
       and slow decision making.

   ●   Investment: ​Investment in infrastructure improves productivity and ensures firms can
       deliver and produce their product reliably, cheaply and efficiently. Investment in
       research and development allows firms to develop new products, which increases
       competitiveness as other countries won’t have these products, and new technology,
       which reduces costs and increases efficiency.

   ●   Taxation: High levels of taxation reduce investment and so cause a reduction in
       international competitiveness in the long term. It can also reduce incentives for
       individuals to take risk, and thus reduce innovation.




                            www.pmt.education
   ●   Inflation: ​Low levels of inflation increase competitiveness since UK goods increase
       in price by less than goods in other countries and so they become more competitive
       over time.

   ●   Economic stability: If the country is not seen as stable, then there will be little
       long-term investment and so this will reduce competitiveness overtime.

   ●   Flexibility: If the labour market is flexible, this will improve competitiveness as
       businesses will be able to move labour in response to changes in demand and
       prevent unnecessary wage rises (a lack of flexibility would mean higher wages had to
       be offered to get people to move jobs). This keeps costs and prices low. Moreover,
       flexible and efficient managers will be able to manage change within the company
       and adapt production when demand for products changes.

   ●   Competition and demand at home: A good level of domestic demand will mean
       that firms in the country will already be producing in large numbers, experiencing
       economies of scale, and so have low AC curves. Similarly, high levels of competition
       will mean firms will have to have good quality or cheap products to survive. Both of
       these mean they will be able to compete internationally.

   ●   Factors of production: A country with a lot of good quality factors of production will
       be able to produce more and better quality goods than a country which has limited or
       poor quality resources.

   ●   Openness to trade: This means trade barriers will be low and so other countries are
       likely to have low barriers on goods coming from the UK, meaning it is easier and
       cheaper to export. It also means that firms inside the UK will not suffer from high
       costs of production due to import barriers.



Benefits and problems of competitiveness:

International competitiveness has some winners and some losers.


   ●   By being competitive, a country will experience ​current account surpluses​. This
       surplus allows them the opportunity to invest overseas and build up a surplus of
       assets overseas, on which interest, profit and dividends can be earned.

   ●   A competitive economy is likely to attract inflows of ​foreign investment​, whether this
       be by establishing new companies (creating jobs) or buying domestic firms. This will
       lead to a transfer of knowledge, skills and technology to firms.

   ●   Employment ​is likely to increase because more goods are being produced, since
       more goods are exported and less are imported, so more are sold internationally and
       domestically. A rise in demand for labour will lead to a ​rise in wages.




                           www.pmt.education
●   There will be ​economic growth​, both by supply side improvements due to efficiency
    and investment and by demand side improvements relating to X-M.

●   However, the problem with being internationally competitive is that this
    competitiveness can be ​easily lost​. Developing countries who have benefits due to
    lower costs of labour and costs of materials etc. could see this eroded when they
    experience export led growth due to their competitiveness. A current account surplus
    may lead to a ​rise in the exchange rate​, reducing their competitiveness. Less
    competitive countries may implement trade barriers to protect themselves. Despite
    this, international competitiveness is not always lost with development e.g. ​Singapore
    and Germany.

●   Countries who are competitive may become ​more dependent ​on overseas countries
    and so this may mean they suffer from larger issues if there is a global recession.




                        www.pmt.education
