Edexcel Economics (A) A-level
Theme 4: A Global Perspective
 4.3 Emerging and Developing
             Economies
               Detailed Notes




       www.pmt.education
                     4.3.1 Measures of development
Whilst economic growth is measured purely by real GDP and the productive potential of the
country, economic development is about ​improvements in living standards​.




Human Development Index:

HDI is a measure of economic development calculated by the UN. It is a ​composite index
based on three factors:
   o health​ as measured by life expectancy at birth
   o education as measured by the mean years of schooling of adults aged 25+ and the
       expected years of schooling of a current 5-year-old over their lives
   o income ​as measured by real GNI per capita at purchasing power parity.
Each of the three indicators is given equal weighting and a mean is taken to give a figure
between 0 and 1. The higher the number, the greater the level of development.

Advantages and disadvantages:
   ●   It takes into account ​three key factors ​which are important for the development of a
       country.
   ●   It is ​relatively easy to calculate because governments tend to collect the statistics
       used in the data.
   ●   However, there are some ​issues with the figures​: health takes no notice of the
       quality of life that people enjoy and education doesn’t take into account the quality
       and success of education.
   ●   There is no consideration for the ​equality of income​.
   ●   Also, there are ​other factors which affect development, for example freedom from
       corruption or the environment.




                           www.pmt.education
It is ​only an indicator and not a precise measure​, so should not be expected to be perfect.


Other indicators:

The Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index (IHDI):

   ●   This is an adjustment of HDI which includes a fourth indicator of development:
       inequality. ​The Atkinson Index adjusts measures for education, health and income
       according to the level of inequality. It is ​broader than HDI ​but can still be criticised
       for not taking into account more measures and quality.

The Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI):

   ●   This measures the ​percentage of the population that is multidimensional poor​. It
       uses data for health, education and standard of living but uses a broader range of
       indicators within these categories.

   ●   Years of schooling and school attendance data is used for education; child mortality
       and nutrition data for health; and availability of electricity, sanitation and safe drinking
       water in households, cooking fuel used, assets owned and the type of floor in a
       house for standard of living.

   ●   It highlights the countries where some areas are extremely rich but where most of the
       population is not and ​focuses on poverty​. However, it cannot be calculated for all
       countries as the ​data is not always available​. It also doesn’t take into account the
       environment.

The Genuine Progress Indicator:

   ●   It is calculated from ​26 different indicators grouped into three main categories:
       economic, environmental and social​. It aims to look at ​economic sustainability​,
       to ensure development does not limit the amount produced and consumed in the
       future.

   ●   The economic category looks at personal consumption, inequality and the cost of
       unemployment. Environmental accounts for the cost of pollution, loss of natural
       areas, CO​2 emissions, ozone depletion and the depletion of non-renewable
       resources. In social, the 10 indicators range from the value of housework and
       parenting to the cost of crime and commuting to the value of volunteer work.

   ●   They tend to show developed countries experiencing negative growth over time, due
       to their impact on the environment. Some argue this proves that development is
       unsustainable whilst others argue the index is biased and is constructed to prove
       the ​anti-growth case​.




                            www.pmt.education
Moreover, figures like changes in ​electricity production or the ​numbers with a mobile
phone per thousand of the population can show development levels. These are easier to
calculate than indexes.



       4.3.2 Factors influencing growth and development

Economic factors:

Primary product dependency:

   ●   Primary products include agriculture, mining etc. A large amount of most developing
       country’s economic activity is based on a primary product. These cause issues for a
       number of reasons.

   ●   Natural disasters can wipe out production of the primary product and so means that
       farmers are left with no income. They are often ​non-renewable​, which means the
       country will suffer when they run out of the product.

   ●   They tend to have a ​low-income elasticity of demand​, which means as people get
       wealthier, they don’t continue to increase the amount of primary products they buy
       whereas they are likely to increase their demand for manufactured goods. The
       Prebisch Singer Hypothesis ​suggests the long run price of primary goods declines
       in proportion to manufactured goods, which means those dependent on primary
       exports will see a fall in their terms of trade. However, in recent years, there has been
       a ​rise in the prices of some key commodities​, such as food and a fall in prices of
       some manufactured goods due to the expansion to places like China.

   ●   Another issue caused by this is the ​Dutch disease​. This is when a country becomes
       a significant commodity producer in a short amount of time, causing an increase in
       demand for the currency (to enable people to buy the goods) which pushes its value
       up. This increases export prices and leads to a reduction in competitiveness of the
       economy, causing a fall in output in other areas. This occurred for the non-oil sectors
       in ​Venezuela and Nigeria​.

   ●   Some countries have been able to use primary products to develop, for example
       Saudi Arabia and oil​. It is suggested that countries should use primary product
       revenue to invest ​in manufacturing etc.

   ●   Not all primary products have a low income elasticity of demand, for example
       diamonds.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   One example of a country that suffers from this is ​Ghana​. ​Gold, cocoa and oil
       account for 75% of their total exports and they had to ask the IMF for a loan in 2014
       due to their unsustainable balance of payments deficit.​ (IMF website)


Volatility of commodity prices:

   ●   Primary products tend to have ​inelastic demand and supply curves which means
       relatively small changes in demand or supply leads to ​huge fluctuations in price.

   ●   These large changes in price mean that ​producers’ income and the ​country’s
       earnings are also rapidly fluctuating, making it ​difficult to plan and carry out long
       term investment as well as meaning that producers can see their income fall very
       rapidly, causing ​poverty.

   ●   When prices of commodities rise for a number of years, there tends to be
       over-investment in the production of the commodity causing long term risk when the
       price eventually falls.


Savings gap:

   ●   Developing countries have lower incomes and thus they save less. This means there
       is less money for banks to lend, reducing borrowing and thus reducing
       investment/consumption. A savings gap is the ​difference between actual savings
       and the level of savings needed to achieve a higher growth rate.

   ●   The savings rate in Africa is around 17% of GDP compared to 31% on average for
       middle income countries (Tutor2u). ​India is another country with a low savings as a
       share of GDP.

   ●   The ​Harrod-Domar model suggests savings provide the funds which are borrowed
       for investment purposes and that growth rates depend on the level of saving and the
       productivity of investment. It concludes that economic growth depends on the amount
       of labour and capital and that developing countries have a vast labour supply, so
       their problems are caused by capital. In order to improve capital, investment is
       necessary and investment requires savings.

   ●   However, there are problems with this model. ​Economic growth is not the same as
       economic development. ​It is difficult for individuals to save when they have little
       income and borrowing from overseas causes problems with debt. It is possible that
       investment could be wasted​.




                           www.pmt.education
Foreign currency gap:

   ●    This is when ​exports from a developing country are too low ​compared to imports
        to finance the ​purchase of investment or other goods from overseas required for
        faster economic growth.


   ●    One country which suffers from this is ​Ethiopia. In 2018, public debt was around 60%
        of GDP; most of it in foreign currency so it is possible that they will not have enough
        foreign currency to repay their debt. It is thought there are only enough currency
        reserves to pay for a month of imports. ​(The Economist)


Capital flight:

   ●    Large amounts of money are ​taken out of the country​, rather than being left there
        for people to borrow and invest. If money was placed in banks within the country,
        then credit could be created by banks for consumers and businesses to spend.

   ●    This can occur because of lack of confidence in the country’s stability, to hide it from
        government authorities or simply for profit repatriation.

   ●    This caused the ​Argentine economic crisis in 2001.


Demographic factors:

   ●    Developing countries tend to have ​higher population growth​, which limits
        development. If population grows by 5%, the economy needs to grow by 5% to even
        maintain living standards. This means developing countries need to have higher
        rates of growth to develop than more developed countries would do.

   ●    The high population growth is caused by high birth rates, which increases ​the
        number of dependents within a country but does not immediately increase those of
        working age. It places strains on the ​education system and leads to ​youth
        unemployment​.

   ●    The ​population of Africa is expected to more than double by 2050, complicating
        efforts to reduce hunger.


Debt:

   ●    During the 1970s and 1980s, developing countries received vast loans from banks in
        the developed world. Now, they suffer from ​high levels of interest repayment​;
        sometimes even higher than the loans and aid they receive from developed
        countries, meaning ​money is flowing from developing to developed countries​.




                            www.pmt.education
   ●   This means they have ​less money to spend on services for their population and
       they may need to ​raise taxes​, which limits growth and development.

   ●   Borrowing for growth makes sense, just as firms borrow to expand, but the problem
       occurs when governments take on too much debt and do not spend it well.

   ●   Nigeria’s debt is 52% of GDP.


Access to credit and banking:

   ●   Developing countries have ​limited access to credit and banking compared to
       developed countries, who have complex systems. This means those in developing
       countries cannot access ​funds for investment and they struggle to ​save for the
       future​.

   ● Some families may use ​loan sharks​, who give high interest rates and leave
       individuals permanently in debt.


Infrastructure:

   ●   In a developed country, there is a complex network of buildings, roads, ports,
       railways, airports, utilities and electricity cables.

   ●   Low levels of infrastructure make it ​hard for businesses to trade and set up ​within
       the country, for example if there are a lack of roads. It makes their services and
       production less reliable.

   ●   However, the development of infrastructure can be ​expensive and tends to conflict
       with ​environmental goals.

   ●   India is a good example of country suffering from poor infrastructure. For example,
       they saw power blackouts in 2012 and this damages their potential tourism industry.
       About half their roads are not paved and they need to invest around $400bn in the
       power sector. ​(Tutor2u)


Education/skills:

   ●   Poor education within these countries means that workers are low skilled, sometimes
       unable to read and write, so have ​low levels of productivity​.

   ●   Countries like ​China and South Korea invested heavily in their human capital when
       they were developing, and this has benefitted them in the long term. Ethiopia suffers
       from ​high illiteracy rates at around only 49%.​ (Unesco)




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   However, there is debate about what ​type of education is needed and problems
       concerning ​over-education​ i.e. if graduates are unable to find graduate level jobs.


Absence of property rights:


   ●   Property rights are where individuals are allowed to own and decide what happens to
       certain resources. A lack of rights mean that individuals and businesses c​annot use
       the law to protect their assets, leading to reduced investment. They will be
       unwilling to buy machinery, build factories or establish brands.


   ●   The loss of property rights in ​Zimbabwe​ led to economic collapse.



Non-economic factors:

   ●   Many developing countries suffer from ​corruption​. Corruption means individuals will
       make decisions which maximise the bribes they receive as oppose to those which
       maximise development and output. Leaders are likely to make decisions which
       benefit themselves rather than benefiting the economy. ​High levels of bureaucracy
       are often linked to corruption and this is costly and time-consuming, deterring new
       businesses and reducing output of those already established. ​Ghana’s high level of
       freedom and democracy ​is one reason why it has been able to develop so quickly.

   ●   Diseases such as HIV/AIDS and malaria have a negative impact on economic
       growth.

   ●   Countries with ​poor climates and geographical terrain ​may suffer from natural
       disasters and it may be difficult for farmers or to set up businesses.

   ●   Many countries suffer from ​civil wars, ​for example ​Syria and Iraq. This causes high
       levels of poverty and destroys infrastructure, making it very difficult for the country to
       rebuild even after the war has ended.




                            www.pmt.education
       4.3.3 Strategies influencing growth and development




Market-orientated strategies:

Trade liberalisation​:

   ●    Countries can aim for export led-growth.

   ●    Removing trade barriers will mean that domestic industries either close or are forced
        to become as efficient as other world producers. Resources will be allocated to
        their best use where the country has a comparative advantage.


   ●    Countries like Singapore and South Korea and regions like Hong Kong have
        benefitted from this method.

Promotion of FDI:

   ●    FDI is ​investment by one private sector company in one country into another
        private sector company in another​. It includes direct acquisition of a foreign firm,
        construction of a facility, investment in a joint venture with a local firm or licensing of
        intellectual property.

   ●    Firms tend to undertake FDI because production costs are lower in developing
        countries and because it enables them access to a new market.

   ●    It is different from a loan because if the investment fails, it is the company who has to
        deal with it and the ​country does not owe money to foreigners​.




                             www.pmt.education
  ●   It also involves the ​transfer of knowledge from one country to another, with the
      company bringing production and management techniques and training for staff
      which will benefit the country as a whole.

  ●   It will ​create jobs and leads to the effect of the multiplier. Labour productivity tends to
      increase and wages are often higher. It is a source of investment and can help to ​fill
      the savings gap​.

  ●   However, there is usually a ​repatriation of profits and developing countries may
      find the company ​exploits them, by offering lower wages and poorer conditions than
      they would in a developed country.

  ●   The country will also ​lose some sovereignty and become dependent on another
      firm. Local competition may find it hard to set up and compete and the best jobs often
      go to imported labour, leaving only low skilled jobs for locals.

  ●   Environmental damage and exploitation of natural resources and tend to
      become problems.

  ●   India has benefited greatly from FDI. The Make In India initiative liberalised FDI
      policy and led to a 48% increase in FDI in a range of sectors, including
      pharmaceuticals, manufacturing and railways.

  ●   Samsung’s investment in Vietnam has been crucial. Many local firms are now a part
      of their supply chain and other businesses have set up around their factories, for
      example hotels and restaurants.

Removal of government subsidies:

  ●   Subsidies are placed on essential items within a country, such as food or fuel, or
      target agriculture and industry in an attempt to increase output and investment. They
      can be an effective way of ​minimising absolute poverty and ​ensuring a minimum
      standard of living​ but they create many problems.

  ●   They are often ​poorly targeted since subsidies on basic goods like rice will benefit
      everyone in the country, not just the poor. Economic theory suggests the problem
      would be better solved by giving poor households cash payments, as this would
      mean they were targeted at the poor.

  ●   Subsidies to farmers and producers tend to lead to ​inefficiency and if they are given
      a large amount over a long period of time, the subsidy becomes ineffective in
      increasing development. In other cases, they can be beneficial in allowing an ​infant
      industry​ to grow.

  ●   They represent a ​large amount of government spending​, incurring an opportunity
      cost and often leading to high levels of debt.




                           www.pmt.education
  ●    They can also cause problems in terms of ​corruption and criminality, for example ​in
       Venezuela subsidised fuel is smuggled across its borders and sold in neighbouring
       countries for profit. The fuel subsidies have also led to high emissions, an unintended
       consequence.

  ●    Removing a subsidy can be very ​politically unpopular and some governments have
       even been thrown out because of attempting to do this. The best time to remove a
       subsidy is when the free market price is falling, as this means the removal is less
       noticeable to the people.

  ●    Venezuela has placed subsides on almost all goods due to high inflation and low
       wages, but this is still not enough and demand is still higher than supply.

Floating exchange rate systems:

  ●    In these systems, market forces determine the currency. The country does not have
       to worry about their ​gold and foreign currency reserves and the government does
       not intervene.

  ●    However, there are problems with this. It means that the currency can be ​volatile
       which makes it difficult for exporters/importers to make decisions about the ​future
       and can cause large changes in macroeconomic variables, including economic
       growth.

Microfinance schemes:

  ●    These schemes aim to give poor and near-poor households ​permanent access to a
       range of financial services​, including loans, savings, insurance and fund transfers.
       It is used to refer to loans from providers known as microfinance institutions (MFI)
       who deliver small loans to unsalaried borrowers, such as ‘​Opportunity​’.

  ●    They take little or no collateral and use group lending, pre-loan saving requirements
       and an implicit guarantee of access to future loans if present loans are repaid fully
       and promptly. It allows borrowers to ​invest​ in their businesses or start up new ones.

   ●   The scheme tends to target groups who would be less likely to otherwise receive
       loans, for example ​women​.

  ●    However, ​South Africa ​has shown the problems that can occur with this system. It
       has become a method of ​financing consumption spending and unemployment
       means that most people ​do not have the funds necessary to ensure repayment of
       their loan, meaning they have to sell off family assets, borrow from friends and family
       or simply take out new loans to repay the old ones. When actually used for
       investment, it has simply ​increased the informal economy with very little being
       spent on sustainable methods of development. Financial resources have been




                           www.pmt.education
       diverted away from more productive and sustainable activities, for example
       manufacturing.

Privatisation:

   ●   Privatisation can ​end the corruption within a firm who is owned by the state, as well
       as encouraging them to be more efficient by ​increasing competition​.

   ●   Selling off a firm, particularly if it is loss making, will ​improve government finances
       and reduce levels of debt.

   ●   However, if the firm is privatised as a ​monopoly ​there will be no competition within
       the market. On top of this, it can be ​associated with corruption where politicians or
       officials sell the company at below market price to a friend or family member or
       receive bribes to accept one company’s bid.

   ●   The ​water industry in Ghana was privatised in 2006 but when the contract was
       expired in 2011, the government did not extend it. Water quality improved but
       reliability did not. There had been increased revenue and efficiency and improved
       customer service.



Interventionist strategies:

Development of human capital:

   ●   This would provide workers with skills and training and thus help them to be more
       efficient and ​improve productivity​. Businesses struggle to expand where there are
       skills shortages and it also limits innovation.

   ●   Human capital could be developed through schools or vocational training, whether
       this be apprenticeships or simply classes provided for business people.

   ●   Higher skills would allow the country to develop from the primary sector to a
       manufacturing sector, ​overcoming primary product dependency.

   ●   Better education also improves ​quality of life​.

   ●   Both ​China and South Korea developed their human capital massively in order to
       develop.




                            www.pmt.education
Protectionism:

   ●   Protectionism ​allows domestic industries to grow by keeping foreign goods out
       and protects them from strong competition. They can use a policy of ​import
       substitution​, where they deliberately attempt to replace imported goods with
       domestically produced goods by adopting protectionist measures.

   ●   This will ​create jobs in the short run and will allow the industry to develop, perhaps
       to the extent where the ​barriers can be removed​, and the industry can compete
       globally.

   ●   However, it means countries ​lose out from the benefits of specialisation and
       comparative advantage and could cause ​inefficiency​, since domestic producers
       suffer from a lack of competition. Other countries are likely to ​retaliate.

Managed exchange rates:

   ●   The currency could be ​fixed against a number of different exchange rates​. They
       can introduce high exchange rates for the import of essential products and lower
       exchange rates for others. There could be an even lower one for exports. A high
       exchange rate for essential products will mean that the price within the country is low,
       which helps to reduce poverty if the goods are consumer goods and encourages
       investment if they are capital goods. A lower exchange rate for other imports will
       mean that the price of these goods within the country is higher, discouraging their
       import and encouraging consumers to buy from domestic producers.

   ●   The problem with these tiered exchange rates is that they often ​fail to work in
       practice​; black markets in foreign exchange develop which can destabilise the
       system and corruption becomes an issue, when government officials buy currency at
       one exchange rate and sell it for profit at another.

   ●   Alternatively, governments can manage a ​single exchange rate which will ​reduce
       volatility​, but speculation may mean that countries find it difficult to maintain an
       exchange rate over a number of years.

Infrastructure development:

   ●   Infrastructure is ​essential for development​; a country needs roads, airports,
       schools, hospitals, railways etc.

   ●   Interventionists believe the government should provide these systems whilst a
       market-based system would be for the private sector to provide them. Infrastructure
       tends to suffer from the ​free rider problem and has ​very high capital costs​, making
       it unlikely the private sector will develop it. Moreover, it has ​many positive social
       benefits​ which suggests the government should provide it.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   One problem of this is that the ​government may not have the funds to provide the
       infrastructure and it is argued that they may be ​inefficient. Infrastructure projects are
       often associated with ​bribery and corruption​, cause ​environmental damage and
       may be poorly built and maintained.

   ●   Some argue that ​intermediate technology​, which uses local materials and can be
       fixed locally, is better than large scale infrastructure.

Promoting joint ventures with global companies:

   ●   One way to ​reduce the exploitation of countries as a result of FDI would be to set
       up a joint venture. The government may insist that firms setting up production plants
       in their country find a local partner to create a jointly owned company with. This will
       help to keep some of the ​profits generated within the country​, which can be used
       in investment.

   ●   Tata Starbucks Pvt.Ltd is a joint venture company with Starbucks in India

Buffer stock schemes:

   ●   This is where the government imposes both a ​maximum and minimum price for
       goods​, ​buying up stocks when there is excess supply and ​selling them off when
       there is excess demand. As a result, it should be ​self-financing​: money is raised
       when selling the products, which allows the government to buy the next lot of stocks.

   ●   It is used on ​commodities, ​where the prices are volatile, and can either be set up by
       a group of countries or within a country. When it works effectively, it is beneficial
       because it ​stabilises prices and thus encourages investment since producers can
       plan for the long term. It also prevents sharp falls in prices, meaning that producers
       are kept from falling into absolute poverty, and prevents sharp rises in prices,
       meaning that consumers are able to afford the good. It can solve some of the issues
       relating to ​primary product dependency​.

   ●   However, it ​requires stocks to go up and down​; if they keep rising, then the
       scheme will run out of money and if they keep falling, the scheme will run out of
       stocks. They require ​huge start-up costs​, as well as administration costs and
       problems of storage.

   ●   Other countries may benefit from a buffer stock system since it keeps global prices
       fairly stable when undertaken by a group of countries, and so they can be seen as
       free riders of the system. This may mean that some countries will not want to
       introduce the system.

   ●   The biggest issue is that minimum prices may be set too high, encouraging
       producers to become ​inefficient​. They will produce as much as they like and know




                            www.pmt.education
       they will be able to sell it anyway, meaning that supply is high and the government
       has to continually buy up the stocks.

   ●   If the scheme is operating at a loss, the taxpayer feels the burden and ​government
       finances ​are worsened.

   ●   The Ivory Coast and Ghana implemented a buffer stock scheme for cocoa in 2017
       due to low prices



Other strategies:
Industrialisation:

   ●   The ​Lewis model assumed that developing countries had ​dual economies with a
       traditional agricultural sector, which had low wages, low productivity,
       underemployment and low savings, and a modern industrial sector, with high levels
       of investment and urbanisation.

   ●   It suggested that the ​modern industrial sector would attract workers from rural
       areas by offering higher wages. Lewis believed that labour productivity was so low in
       agricultural areas that people leaving the area would have no impact on output and
       would in fact mean there was a surplus of food, since the same amount was being
       shared amongst less people. Those who moved to the urban areas would have
       higher incomes​ and thus ​more savings for investment​.

   ●   He believed ​savings and investment were the key to growth and thus growth
       could be achieved through rural-to-urban migration.

   ●   However, although labour productivity is low for some parts of the year, during
       planting and harvesting ​vast amounts of labour is needed. Also, it is not necessarily
       true that those with ​higher wages will save and invest​ their money.

   ●   Recently, migration has led to ​urban poverty replacing rural poverty as the industrial
       sector is unable to provide jobs for all those who have moved. ​Improvements in
       technology​ will lead to a reduced demand for labour.

   ●   It can be argued that industrialisation is a ​result of development​, rather than a
       cause.

   ●   It is possible for the government to build factories and plants to ​encourage the
       transition to industrialisation. This has been successful in countries such as ​South
       Korea​, but in many countries the industry fails and so there is just a waste of scarce
       resources.




                           www.pmt.education
  ●   Instead of industrialising, ​India went from agriculture to services as this is where they
      had a comparative advantage. This shows that ​not all countries will develop in the
      same way​.

Development of tourism:

  ●   Some countries have decided to take advantage of their climate and geography to
      build up a tourism industry, such as the ​Caribbean. This provides them with the
      funds to develop their economy​ and improve living standards.

  ●   The ​income elastic nature of tourism means that as the global economy grows,
      demand for the industry will increase even further, allowing the developing country to
      continue development. However, it also means that they will suffer in times of
      recession.

  ●   Tourists represent a source of ​foreign currency​, which will fill the currency gap. so
      countries will be able to fund their imports without negative consequences. However,
      holidaymakers’ demands for products from their home countries mean that the
      tourism industry is associated with an ​increase in imports and so may not help the
      foreign currency gap at all.

  ●   Countries are likely to attract ​investment from transnational hotel companies, who
      will also bring knowledge with them. It can help to fund ​improvements in
      infrastructure​, as tourism requires reliable electricity, airports, clean water etc. and
      so the government have an incentive to provide this. This investment will have a
      multiplier effect through the economy.

  ●   Jobs are created locally since the tourism industry relies on low skilled workers who
      know the local area, rather than to high skilled workers which may be sourced from
      abroad. It is very labour intensive.

  ●   The government will see ​higher tax revenues due to higher income and higher
      profits. It can provide funds to allow countries to diversify.

  ●   However, the industry is ​seasonal and involves ​low skilled, low paid jobs which
      means the effect of the multiplier is limited. ​Tourism destinations can go in and
      out of fashion​, meaning some areas will see a loss of employment and that
      investment may only receive a short-term return.

  ●   A large amount of wealth created will be withdrawn as TNCs ​repatriate their profits​,
      causing problems involving capital flight.

  ●   On top of this, the country can suffer from a large number of ​externalities, including
      pollution, waste, environmental damage and impact on culture.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   In Morocco, 7 eco-resorts are being built on the north coast where unemployment is
       40%.​ (The Economist)

Development of primary industries:

   ●   Some countries, such as ​Saudi Arabia, Norway and Australia​, were able to develop
       because of an abundance in natural resources. The development of a primary
       industry provides ​funds to allow a country to diversify as well as allowing
       infrastructure development​ and ​better education​.

   ●   However, primary products are volatile and ​primary product dependency causes
       many issues. Primary industries also suffer from ​corruption.

   ●   The government can ​address the Dutch Disease​, for example ​in Norway the
       government uses some of its oil revenues to invest overseas and this increases
       supply of their currency, depreciating it and helping other industries to compete
       overseas.

Fairtrade schemes:

   ●   Fairtrade is defined as being ‘a trading partnership based on dialogue, transparency
       and respect, which seeks greater equity in international trade’. (WTFO) There are a
       number of organisations which monitor that what is being sold under the Fairtrade
       label conforms to a number of key principles: ​a fair price, community development,
       fair working conditions and protecting the environment.

   ●   A fair price typically means that agreements are made to buy a guaranteed amount of
       produce over a period of time at a price which is above the market price when the
       agreement was made. This gives producers ​stability and raises their income​.

   ●   The system means that ​child labour is not used and that production is sustainable
       and does not take place at the expense of ​environmental degradation​.

   ●   A study carried out in ​Sri Lanka showed that those under fair trade had ​higher
       income and satisfaction, a greater understanding of the market and a more
       optimistic view of the future than those not under fair trade. They were able to ​save
       for the future and invest or provide financial support for their children. However, they
       still did not feel their income was sufficient.

   ●   It is argued that the system has an ​insignificant impact on the developing world. It
       benefits the Fairtrade producers but can leave others worse off since non-Fairtrade
       producers see a fall in demand. In the long term, the higher price for Fairtrade goods
       will increase supply and thus this could bring price back down, but this will depend on
       the price elasticity of supply.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   Another issue is that higher incomes ​reduces the incentive to diversify and keeps
       farmers engaged in low profit activities. On the other hand, it can be argued that it
       allows parents to send their ​children to school (whether because it provides the
       funds necessary or means children are no longer expected to stay at home to work
       the land) and this will allow them to gain skills which in the future will allow them to
       move away from agriculture.

Aid:

   ●   This is when a country voluntarily transfers resources to another or gives loans on
       concessionary terms. There are different types of aid:
          o tied aid is aid with conditions attached, such as economic or political reforms
               or a commitment to buy goods from the donor country
          o bilateral aid is directly from one country to another
          o multilateral aid is when countries give aid to an international organisation who
               distributes it to other countries.
          o concessional loans are loans given on lower, or no, interest rates

   ●   Egypt, Afghanistan and Vietnam are the greatest recipients of aid, whilst the EU and
       US are the largest donors.

   ●   Aid is good as it is able to ​reduce absolute pove​rty, particularly emergency relief
       provided after disasters such as the ​Haiti earthquake (2010). However, it is unclear
       whether the money really reduces absolute poverty, as improving infrastructure does
       little to help those who suffering most.

   ●   It can ​fill the savings gap​, as outlined by Harrod-Domar, and thus provides funds for
       investment, whether this be in infrastructure or in human capital. Both of these often
       have to be done by the government because they can be seen as public goods and
       suffer from the free rider problem. It also provides foreign exchange to ​fill the
       foreign currency gap​.

   ●   It can contribute to ​increased globalisation and trade as well as reducing world
       inequality.

   ●   However, some argue it results in a ​dependency culture where countries are
       unconcerned by their finances as they know they can receive aid from another
       country.

   ●   Corruption means that money does not always go to where it is meant to. In the long
       term, tied aid and concessional loans may mean that the country loses out. Since
       concessional loans still have to be repaid, this may limit where the money is spent;
       countries may only spend money on things they know will see a return in the short
       term.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   It is difficult to know the best way to develop a country and therefore it is ​difficult to
       know the best place to spend the aid.

Debt relief:

   ●   Many countries suffer greatly from the ​high interest repayments to loans they have
       taken out. It limits the growth of some of the poorest countries, whilst being relatively
       small for the countries and agencies that are owed the money. Therefore, it seems
       reasonable for the debt of developing countries to be written off.

   ●   It will ease government finances and allow more ​money to be spent on provision
       of services​ and infrastructure to aid development.

   ●   However, it causes ​moral hazard because it creates a precedent: every poor country
       may now expect to receive debt relief. It also ​eases pressure on weak governments
       to adopt reforms and good economic policies.




International institutions and NGOs:

World Bank:

   ●   The World Bank was founded at the Bretton Woods Conference after the Second
       World War. It aims to bring about ​long-term development and a reduction in
       poverty​.

   ●   It is made up of:
            o the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
            o the International Development Association (IDA)
            o the International Finance Corporation (IFC)
            o the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
            o and the International Centre for Settle of Investment Disputes (ICSID).
       The IBRD and IDA provide ​financing, policy advice and technical assistance​: IDA
       helps the poorest countries whilst IBRD helps middle income and creditworthy poorer
       countries. IFC, MIGA and ICSID help ​strengthen the private sector in developing
       countries by providing them with ​finance, technical assistance, political risk
       insurance and settlement of disputes​.

   ●   The World Bank has funded over ​12,000 development projects since 1947 through
       interest free loans and grants and supports long term human and social
       development.




                            www.pmt.education
International Monetary Fund (IMF):

   ●   Like the World Bank, the IMF was set up in the Bretton Woods Conference but it was
       not set up to promote economic development, instead to ensure that ​exchange rate
       systems work well.

   ●   They provide loans to help countries when there are ​international exchange rate
       crises​ or when they cannot afford to pay off their international debt.

   ●   When providing loans, the IMF insists that countries make ​macroeconomic reforms
       to resolve the problems. The IMF has received criticism for this because it causes
       problems for countries. Usually, it involves ​reducing imports and increasing
       exports which reduces the amount of resources available for domestic consumption.
       It can also be in the form of ​lower government spending​.

   ●   However, countries are not forced to turn to the IMF for help but many do because
       the ​alternative is defaulting on their loans​, which would cause even more
       problems than the reforms do. The reforms intend to ​help countries to overcome
       issues and should allow a country to develop in the long term; they are not meant to
       be a punishment.

   ●   The IMF also provides ​advice which aims to bring about ​economic stability and
       raise living standards ​and help countries to ​develop their economic institutions
       through training and technical assistance, for example the ​central bank in Kosovo.


NGOs:

   ●   These are ​non-profit organisations that are run independently from the
       government​.

   ●   Firstly, they can provide ​direct assistance to countries in the form of project work,
       for example Oxfam or CAFOD. This can range from education to wells to healthcare
       and can either be emergency or long term.

   ●   On top of this, they can act as ​pressure groups to lobby governments to adopt more
       pro-development strategies.

   ●   A problem of NGOs is that it is believed that ​they alone can never solve the
       problem​, it is the government who has to fix the issues.

   ●   On top of this, many see them as having an ​anti-capitalist agenda which blames
       problems on the World Bank, the IMF and the WTO. This causes divisions in the
       development project and is also an issue since past experience suggests global
       capitalism is the best system for development.




                           www.pmt.education
