Edexcel Economics (A) A-level
Theme 4: A Global Perspective
  4.5 Role of the State in the
       Macroeconomy
               Detailed Notes




       www.pmt.education
                           4.5.1 Public expenditure
The government spends money for a number of reasons. It is used for macroeconomic
management to control AD and achieve macroeconomic objectives: economic growth, low
and stable inflation, balanced current account and low unemployment. Moreover, they aim
for equity and equality by providing services to individuals or groups who would otherwise
not receive them. Additionally, government spending can correct market failure by providing
public goods and fixing externalities.



Types of expenditure:

   ●   Capital government expenditure is spending on investment goods such as new
       roads, schools and hospitals which will be consumed in over a year.
   ●   General government final consumption is spending on goods and services that will
       be consumed within the next year, such as public-sector salaries.
   ●   Transfer payments are government payments for which there is no corresponding
       output, where money is taken from one group and given to another, for example
       benefits and pensions.
   ●   The government also has to spend money on interest payments for national debt.
       The ​current government expenditure is general government final consumption plus
       transfer payments plus interest payments.

The major areas of expenditure are: defence (6%), protection (4%), education (12%),
pensions (20%), welfare (15%), transport (2%) and health care (18%). 7% of all government
spending is on interest repayments of loans.



Composition and size of public expenditure:

   ●   In most mixed and free economies, the ​lower the average income of the country,
       the lower is likely to be the percentage of GDP spent by the government. This is
       because poorer countries tend to have a ​lower tax revenue​, due to avoidance,
       inefficiency at collecting and a smaller amount of wealth to tax. Moreover, citizens in
       higher income countries ​demand more services from their governments​;
       government provided goods are income elastic. For example, access to improving
       technologies means that more is demanded from the NHS compared to what would
       be demanded of state healthcare in poorer countries.
   ●   However, amongst developed countries, there are ​significant differences in the size
       of government spending. For example the ​USA has much lower state spending, and
       this is due to ​attitudes​ in that country.

   ●   The ​Global Financial Crisis led to huge increases in government spending as
       governments had to increase welfare payments and some governments used




                           www.pmt.education
       taxpayer money to bail out the banks. In the UK, ​the government bought stakes in
       Lloyds and the Royal Bank of Scotland.
   ●   However, ​since 2010 the UK government has been following a ​policy of austerity in
       an attempt to reduce the debt. They have been consistently attempting to reduce
       expenditure where they can. Therefore, the size of spending depends on government
       aims.
   ●   In the next decades, ​Europe and Japan will see pressure on government spending
       due to ​aging populations meaning larger pension bills and higher levels of care
       needed.



Impacts:

Productivity and growth​:

   ●   Free market economists argue that government spending is ​wasteful and causes
       inefficiency. However, the government is able to enjoy ​economies of scale when it
       provides goods, and this improves productivity.
   ●   They also provide the ​infrastructure​, such as roads, necessary for the economy to
       run efficiently.
   ●   Education creates the ​human capital necessary for growth whilst the healthcare
       system reduces the number of days workers lose from ​serious illness​. Spending on
       research and development may not be done by the private sector and the
       government will undertake it to give businesses a long term competitive edge.
   ●   Through spending, the government can create a ​multiplier effect and this can be
       focused on areas of the country with high unemployment, creating growth.

Living standards:

   ●   Government spending can cause large improvements in living standards. The
       government ​corrects market failure and ​provides public goods​, which improves
       social welfare.
   ●   They are also important since they ​reduce absolute poverty by providing benefits
       and basic goods, such as education and healthcare. In developing countries,
       governments do not have the resources to do this and this leads to malnutrition, poor
       water etc.
   ●   There is some debate about how much the government can contribute to improved
       living standards. It is argued that the government will be inefficient at providing goods
       and services and will have a negative disincentive impact on workers, meaning that
       output overall is reduced​ and so living standards fall.
   ●   It can be argued that the government suffers from the ​principal agent problem
       since they make decisions on behalf of the people and individuals may have spent
       that money differently. As a result, there is a loss in welfare and so a fall in living
       standards. However, the ​political system means that society decides the




                           www.pmt.education
       government and so therefore decides to an extent where it would like money to be
       spent.

Crowding out:

   ●   In order to spend money above their tax revenues, the government has to ​borrow
       from individuals and businesse​s. However, the amount of money in the economy
       available to borrow does not increase. The government will therefore be competing
       with the private sector for finance and will cause ​higher interest rates​. This will
       discourage firms from investing and individuals from buying on credit.
   ●   On top of this, the ​limited number of resources in the economy means that for
       every resource used in government spending, there are less resources available for
       the private sector. The result is that government borrowing crowds out private sector
       borrowing and spending and may lead to no real increase in AD.
   ●   Free market economists argue that ​investment would be more efficient if done by
       the private sector and that the government targets investment poorly and is
       wasteful.
   ●   The crowding out effect is felt most at ​full employment​, but it is not always the case.
       Transfer payments have no impact on output and so would not cause crowding out
       as resources are simply taken from one group and given to another; the government
       isn’t taking resources from the economy. Moreover, when levels of unemployment
       are high then extra government spending could lead to ​crowding in ​where it
       encourages investment through the multiplier.

Level of taxation:

   ●   In most cases, where government spending is high, ​levels of tax must be high in
       order for spending to be sustainable. High levels of tax may have a disincentive
       effect.
   ●   Oil-rich countries tend to be an exception, where revenue from oil can pay for most
       of government spending.

Equality:

   ●   Spending should ​increase equality as it leads to redistribution and helps to provide
       a ​minimum standard of living for the poorest in society. It ensures everyone has
       access to ​basic goods​, such as education and healthcare, which will help to give
       them a fair start in life.




                           www.pmt.education
                                   4.5.2 Taxation
Tax is used to ​pay for the number of goods and services that the government provides​.
On top of this, tax can be used to ​correct market failure at a microeconomic level and to
manage the economy and redistribute income ​at a macroeconomic one.

The ​UK government’s current aims include keeping the burden of tax low, improving
incentives, using equitable taxes, correcting market failure and taxing spending rather than
income.




Progressive, proportional and regressive taxes:

   ●   Progressive tax ​is where those who are on higher incomes pay a higher marginal
       rate of tax; they pay a higher percentage of their income on tax. Direct taxes tend to
       be progressive, for example ​income tax​.

   ●   Regressive tax ​is where the proportion of income paid in tax falls as the income of
       the taxpayer rises. Those on higher incomes pay a smaller percentage of their
       income on the tax. Most indirect taxes are regressive, for example everyone pays the
       same rate of ​VAT ​and for those on higher wages this represents a small proportion of
       their earnings compared to those on low wages.

   ●   Proportional tax is where the proportion of income paid on tax remains the same
       whilst the income of the taxpayer changes e.g. 10% of income is spent on tax,
       regardless of income. Everyone pays the same percentage of their income on the
       tax.




                           www.pmt.education
Impacts of tax changes:

Incentives to work:

   ●   It is argued that high marginal rates of tax will ​discourage individuals from
       working​. Free market economists argue that the supply of labour is relatively elastic
       and a reduction in marginal taxes on income will lead to a significant increase in work
       as individuals work longer hours, accept promotions and more people join the
       workforce.
   ●   High taxes on high income earners could encourage them to ​move abroad and
       taxes on the poor may lead to a ​poverty trap​.
   ●   It is i​ncome tax ​which is important: high income tax reduces incentives more than
       high VAT. Thus, a switch from direct to indirect taxes may increase incentives.
   ●   However, there is ​no hard evidence for the link between income tax and incentives.
       Nordic countries have high taxes and welfare benefits but have similar rates of
       growth compared to lower tax and government spending countries like US and UK.
   ●   It can be argued that higher taxes mean people have to ​work longer hours in order
       to maintain their income​ and so even increases the incentive work.


Tax revenues:

   ●   The Laffer curve shows that a ​rise in the tax rate does not necessarily increase
       tax revenue​. If people were taxed at 100%, they would not do any work and this
       means that tax revenue is 0 at both 0% and 100%.
   ●   Tax revenue will initially rise as the tax rate is increased but it will come to a point
       where revenue is maximised and will then fall. As tax rates rise, motivation and drive
       will fall so there will be a fall in output and there is an increased incentive to use tax
                                         ​
       avoidance and tax evasion. T​ is     the ​optimal tax level​, which maximises revenue.




                            www.pmt.education
   ●   Revenue from indirect taxes can be uncertain as they depend on ​consumer
       spending patterns.



Income distribution:

   ●   A ​progressive tax system will increase the equality of income distribution as more
       money is proportionally taken from the rich than from the poor. A ​regressive one will
       decrease income equality. Since direct taxes tend to be progressive and indirect
       taxes regressive, a move from indirect to direct taxes will improve equality.
   ●   Inheritance taxes are the most progressive form of taxation. ​High corporation taxes
       take money from shareholders, who tend to be very well off, and give them to the
       government to spend on the poor.
   ●   One problem with using tax to redistribute income is that it does not give the poor
       anything, so the ​system needs to be supported with benefits​.


Real output and employment:

   ●   Some taxes affect AD whilst others affect AS. A rise in direct taxes will reduce the
       level of disposable income an individual has, which will cause a fall in their spending
       and thus a ​fall in AD. It could also cause a fall in leftover profits for businesses and
       therefore a fall in investment. The effect this has on output will depend on where the
       economy is: whether it is at full employment or not.
   ●   On top of this, higher indirect taxes and NICs increase costs for firms and this will
       decrease SRAS​. This impact will again depend on where the economy is producing.
   ●   It can be argued that income taxes cause a ​disincentive to work and therefore
       reduce LRAS as the most skilled workers go overseas and more people become
       inactive.


Price level:

   ●   As explained above, ​taxes can impact LRAS, SRAS and AD. ​Therefore, these
       changes will impact price depending on where the economy is producing.
   ●   Indirect taxes, particularly VAT, often cause ​cost push inflation.


Trade balance:

   ●   A rise in taxes will decrease income and therefore decrease consumption,
       theoretically this will also mean ​consumers spend less on imports​. Imports in the
       UK have been found to be highly income elastic. As a result, the trade balance will
       improve in the short run.
   ●   However, in the long run, lower AD will reduce businesses’ need to invest and this
       could ​reduce competitiveness​ meaning that exports decrease.




                           www.pmt.education
FDI flows:

   ●   Low taxes on profit and investment tend to ​encourage businesses to invest in a
       country since it will help them to see a higher level of return.
   ●   The problem with this is that it can be a ​‘race to the bottom’ ​where countries have to
       continue to lower their taxes in order to make them the lowest to encourage
       investment; the eventual result is a fall in revenues for all countries.




                        4.5.3 Public sector finances
Automatic stabilisers and discretionary fiscal policy:

   ●   Automatic stabilisers are mechanisms which reduce the impact of changes in the
       economy on national income; government spending and taxation are automatic
       stabilisers. In a recession, benefits increase as more people are unemployed and so
       the benefits are a stabiliser as it means that the overall fall in AD is reduced,
       preventing too much change in the economy. On the other hand, during a boom, tax
       increases as people have more jobs and higher incomes, and this tax reduces
       disposable income so decreases consumption and AD, meaning that demand
       doesn’t grow too high.

   ●   These automatic stabilisers ​cannot prevent fluctuations; they simply reduce the
       size of these problem and there can be negative aspects to these stabilisers.
       Benefits may act as a disincentive to work and lead to higher unemployment whilst
       high levels of tax can decrease the incentive to work hard.

   ●   Discretionary fiscal policy ​is the deliberate manipulation of government
       expenditure and taxes to influence the economy; expansionary and deflationary
       policies.



Fiscal deficit and the national debt:

   ●   The ​national debt is the sum of all government debts built up over many years whilst
       a fiscal deficit​ is when the government spends more than it receives that year.

   ●   They can either be measured in money terms, for example national debt in 2018 is
       around £1.8 trn, or as a percentage of GDP, the UK’s national debt is 87.7% of total
       GDP. The GDP measure is often more useful because it gives an indication of how
       easy to will be for the government to finance a deficit or repay the national debt. In
       2018, the fiscal deficit is​ £48bn, 2.3% of GDP​.




                           www.pmt.education
Distinction between structural and cyclical deficits:

  ●   A ​cyclical deficit is the part of the deficit that occurs because government spending
      and tax fluctuates around the trade cycle. When the economy is in recession, tax
      revenues are low and spending is high creating a larger deficit.

  ●   At the peak of the boom, there is no cyclical deficit; any deficit at this point is a
      structural deficit. The structural deficit is the fiscal deficit which occurs when the
      cyclical deficit is zero; it is long term and not related to the state of the economy.

  ●   The ​actual deficit​ is the structural deficit plus the fiscal deficit.

  ●   Governments can have structural deficits, structural surpluses or structural balances.
      A structural surplus occurs when at the peak of the boom, there is an actual fiscal
      surplus whilst a structural balance occurs when at the peak of the boom, the actual
      fiscal balance is 0.

  ●   If the government has a structural deficit, it is likely that ​national debt will grow over
      time as the government has to consistently borrow money to finance spending. For
      this reason, it is argued that ​structural deficits need to be eliminated but this is
      difficult since it is ​impossible to know what part of the deficit is structural and
      what part of it is cyclical​, just as it is impossible to know the size of the output gap.



Factors influencing the size of fiscal deficits:

  ●   One major factor which influences the fiscal deficit is the ​trade cycle​, as explained
      by the concept of cyclical and structural debts. During a downturn, government tax
      revenue decreases whilst government spending increases and so the deficit
      increases. ​In the UK, the fiscal deficit peaked in 2010 at 10.1% of GDP.

  ●   Unforeseen events​, such as natural disasters or recessions, lead to huge increases
      in spending which increase the deficit.

  ●   On top of this, ​interest rates play a role. If interest rates on government debt
      increase, the amount the government pays in interest repayments increases and this
      is likely to increase the deficit. The impact of this will depend on how significant
      interest repayments are in the size of the deficit. Interest rates depend on market




                            www.pmt.education
      rates and the credit ratings of the government. ​7% of all UK government spending is
      on interest repayments of loans.

  ●   Events like ​privatisation provide one-off payments to the government which will
      decrease the deficit in the short term; it will depend on the value of the company sold.

  ●   Government aims are important in the size of the deficit, as this will influence their
      fiscal policy, for example the austerity aim has helped to decrease the size of the
      deficit but attempting to increase AD would increase spending. ​The austerity policy
      managed to reduce the fiscal deficit by 75% since 2010.

  ●   Many countries with ​high revenues from oil​, for example the OPEC countries, run a
      budget surplus and so government revenue is important in the size of the deficit.

  ●   Factors such as the ​number of dependents ​in a country affect both spending and
      tax revenues so influence the deficit.


Factors influencing the size of national debts:

  ●   If the government is continuously running a deficit, then the national debt will
      increase overtime. There is a consensus view that ​fiscal deficits over 3% will lead
      to growing national debt as a proportion of GDP​. It is only when the government
      runs a budget surplus that the size of the national debt decreases.

  ●   Ageing populations tend to contribute to a high national debt since the government
      runs a structural deficit in order to fund their pensions and care and this leads to a
      high national debt.



The significance of fiscal deficits and national debts:

  ●   High levels of borrowing may ​raise interest rates ​in the economy since an increase
      in the demand for money will increase the price of money, i.e. interest rates. This
      could cause crowding out of the economy. However, this may not always be the case
      as the government may borrow from overseas and during a recession, private sector
      investment falls which means interest rates may remain unchanged.


  ●   Countries have to spend a large amount of money on ​servicing their national debt
      through interest repayments, which has a high opportunity cost. ​The UK spends £70
      billion a year to service its debts but this is small as a percentage of GDP​. A primary
      budget deficit is the actual budget deficit but does not include interest repayments on
      the national debt. The impact will depend on the level of interest rates and the size of
      the primary deficit compared to interest repayments. In a liquidity trap (when interest




                          www.pmt.education
    current budget deficit is one where government revenues are less than current
    expenditure; the government has to borrow money simply to finance day to day
    spending. It is argued that the government should run a current budget surplus to
    enable it to invest for the future, except in recessions when they can run a deficit to
    increase AD. A current budget deficit is problematic as it means that future
    generations are forced to pay the bill for today’s expenditure. However, if the deficit is
    due to capital expenditure, the future generations benefit from increased spending
    and so their extra tax bill to pay for today’s borrowing can be justified. The value of
    debt tends to fall overtime because inflation erodes its value and because a country’s
    GDP grows meaning the debt is easier to pay off, so this limits the impact on future
    generations.

●   High fiscal deficits can cause ​inflation. If the government increases their spending
    and there is no similar fall in private sector spending, AD will rise and this can be
    inflationary. More dangerously, if a government is unable to borrow money, they will
    print more money and this can cause ​hyperinflation as in Germany in 1923 or
    Zimbabwe in 2008​. Printing money will not necessarily cause hyperinflation, it
    depends on how much is printed and where the economy is producing on the LRAS.

●   High levels of debt tend to result in a ​reduced credit rating for the government.
    Private sector companies estimate the likelihood that a government will default on its
    debt and give it a rating from AAA to D. Lower credit ratings mean that lending to the
    government is riskier and so higher interest rates are demanded from lenders.
    However, in reality, it is not the size of the debt that influences the level of risk
    involved with the lending the money, it is whether that country has ever defaulted on
    their loans before and their current economic/political climate.

●   If a government has borrowed from abroad, it may have difficulties getting ​enough
    foreign currency to make repayments on its debt. This could also cause problems
    for consumers as if there is not enough foreign currency, they will be unable to import
    goods.

●   On the other hand, government borrowing can ​benefit growth if it used for capital
    spending since this will improve the supply side of the economy and thus reduce the
    deficit in the long term. On top of this, the budget deficit can be used as a tool for
    short term demand management: Keynesians argue a deficit is acceptable to use as
    a stimulus in demand during recessions.




                         www.pmt.education
       4.5.4 Macroeconomic policies in a global context

Use of policies:

Governments can use ​fiscal policy, monetary policy, supply side policy, exchange rate
policy and direct controls in order to achieve a number of goals. Direct controls include
minimum or maximum prices/wages, quotas on imports, limits on currency or regulation e.g.
maximum interest rates.

Reduce fiscal deficits and national debts:

   ●   To decrease the national debt, the UK government has been using a ​policy of
       austerity ​since 2010, where they attempt to decrease spending. It would also be
       possible to ​increase taxes​. Both of these are unpopular, could limit growth, and
       reduce living standards and income equality. Free market economists say that
       spending can be reduced by ​cutting out waste, but it is highly unlikely that these
       efficiency savings will make a significant difference. ​Sweden used spending cuts and
       tax increases to balance their budget in the 1990s.

   ●   On the other hand, opposition parties offer an alternative in the form of ​demand
       stimulus by high spending​, which will cause economic growth and therefore bring
       about higher tax revenues. This will allow for budget surpluses and eventually a
       reduction of national debt.

   ●   Another approach is to simply rely on automatic stabilisers to allow the economy to
       grow so national debt/fiscal deficit will reduce as a percentage of GDP. This is mainly
       t​he approach that the US took after the Global Financial Crisis ​and their economy
       recovered fairly quickly. ​By 2015, the fiscal deficit as a percentage of GDP was
       similar in the US and UK.

   ●   One way to reduce national debt would be for the government to ​default on their
       loans but the economic cost of this is so large that governments only default if it is
       the only option. ​Russia and Argentina have defaulted on their debts in the past.

Reducing poverty and inequality:

   ●   Free market forces are unlikely to create an equal society, leading to absolute or
       relative poverty and inequality. Most agree that ​some redistribution from rich to
       poor is necessary​, but the degree to which it is done is contentious. Those on the
       right argue that high incomes and profits are essential to provide an incentive, whilst
       those on the left argue that those on low incomes need to be supported.

   ●   Firstly, the government can use a ​progressive tax system which will produce a
       more equal distribution of income after tax. Inheritance taxes mean that wealth




                           www.pmt.education
    inequality will be reduced as less money can be passed on to the next generation.
    However, this tax is difficult to enforce as they are avoidable by careful tax planning.
    Tax in general means that ​money can be taken from the rich and given to the
    poor. However, unit 4.5.2 shows that there are some unintended consequences of
    raising tax, for example a reduction in incentives and the impact of the Laffer Curve.
    The USA has a progressive tax system but the welfare system is not effective at
    redistributing income​. ​In countries such as Finland and Scandinavia, the tax system
    is less progressive but the government collects a lot of tax revenue which they are
    effective at redistributing.

●   Along with this, they can use ​government expenditure in the form of benefits and
    transfer payments. ​Social security and National Insurance benefits now represent
    30% of government spending in the UK​.
        ○ Universal benefits are available to everyone who meet certain criteria,
            respective of personal income e.g. winter fuel allowance, child benefits.
        ○ Means tested benefits ​are only available to people who have sufficiently low
            levels of income/wealth. They are targeted at people who need the most help
            and provide a safety net/minimum standard of living and are better at
            improving inequality since they directly affect the poor.
    Some argue that benefits reduce people’s incentive to work, especially if they can
    earn a similar amount on benefits to what they could in work. The extent to which
    governments should use spending to redistribute income is highly controversial,
    particularly with high levels of national debt and austerity as seen in the UK.

●   The government can also ​provide goods and services which give citizens equal
    opportunities and access to services they may not otherwise be able to afford, such
    as healthcare, education and housing. This helps to ensure that everyone is given an
    equal start in life, for example poor children do not lose out because their parents are
    unable to afford education. The problem with these is that they also benefit those on
    higher incomes and incur a high opportunity cost. ​In the UK, the government provides
    free healthcare, but this is not the case in many countries.

●   Moreover, the government can attempt to​ reduce wage differentials.
       ○ A ​national minimum wage will improve the incomes of the poor whilst
          maximum wages or pay ratios will reduce the incomes of the rich and could
          even mean companies increase the pay of their lowest income workers.
          However, minimum wages may cause unemployment and maximum wages
          may lead to a loss of the most skilled workers.
       ○ Equal pay legislation will prevent inequality between men and women or
          between different ethnic groups.
       ○ Trade union friendly legislation will allow the wages of their workers to rise,
          and those in unions are more likely to be the low paid so this will positively
          affect equality .
       ○ Employers could be forced to ​provide benefits to their workers​, such as
          sickness benefits, pensions and medical care, which will effectively increase
          wages.




                        www.pmt.education
   ●   Improvements in ​access to education and training opportunities ​will prevent
       children from poorer backgrounds achieving less than others, which would reduce
       their earning potential. The government has attempted to address this by offering
       additional funding through the pupil premium scheme and easier access to
       universities, for example lower grades for those in certain areas,

   ●   Moreover, they could introduce ​price controls on essential goods, such as housing,
       bus fares, bread, electricity etc. This will increase the spending power of the poor.
       However, this could cause excess supply and may lead to the development of black
       markets.

   ●   Free market economists use the concept of ​trickle down​, arguing that increasing the
       incomes of the rich will lead to an increase in the income of the poor. The rich create
       jobs by spending their money and employing others and reducing their income would
       reduce employment and lead to lower living standards. They also believe inequality is
       necessary to encourage people to work hard and therefore increase their income.

   ●   The ​law of diminishing marginal utility suggests that ​redistribution increases
       total utility and therefore is a better allocation of resources. The higher the spending
       of an individual, the less satisfaction they gained from spending an extra pound. £10
       a week given to a poor family increases satisfaction more than £10 given to a rich
       family would. ​The high growth rates of Nordic countries, like Denmark, where
       redistribution is high suggests that it is not negative for economic growth.

Changes in interest rate and supply of money:

   ●   The central bank has the ability to change interest rates and monetary supply. They
       may do this for ​domestic reasons​, such as to control inflation, or due to ​global
       issues such as a low exchange rate or a change in world commodity prices. A fall in
       the bank rate is likely to increase the supply of money because it will mean there is
       more demand for loans.

   ●   There is ​no simple relationship between the supply of money and inflation and it
       can be argued that central banks don’t have complete control over the money supply
       because they cannot control the ability of the financial system to create credit. The
       globalisation of the financial market has also made it increasingly harder to control
       domestic money supply.

   ●   The consensus is that central banks should allow inflation caused by supply side
       shocks but ​manage demand side inflation​.

   ●   Following the financial crisis of 2007-08, some central banks were concerned with
       deflation rather than inflation and this led to the policy of ​quantitative easing. For
       example, ​the Bank of England and the European Central Bank used this policy. This
       is because interest rates were so low they could not be reduced much further.




                           www.pmt.education
International competitiveness:

   ●   The government can improve competitiveness by ​taking action to increase any of
       the factors​ which affect competitiveness.

   ●   Supply side measures will improve productivity and flexibility and can involve taxes
       and deregulation. They can encourage competition, forcing firms to be efficient and
       thus competitive within the global market. They can place an emphasis on quality of
       products and use tax incentives to encourage incentives. Education will improve the
       skills of the workforce and help improve flexibility. ​The UK government has
       established the ‘Red Tape Challenge’, which aims to simplify regulation for
       businesses.

   ●   Exchange rate policies may be used, and they may control inflation and
       macroeconomic stability. For example, ​China devalues their currency in order to
       reduce export prices​.

   ●   They can​ join the WTO ​or​ sign trade agreements​.



External shocks:

Due to globalisation, the world’s economies are ​increasingly interdependent​.
Macroeconomic policies can be used to combat the effects of negative shocks to the
economy. One example could be a ​commodity price shock​, for example where oil prices
greatly increase. The government could use expansionary policy to reduce the impact of a
fall in GDP or they could use deflationary policy to reduce the impact on inflation. Another
example may be a ​financial crisis​, where the government can use expansionary policy to
increase AD. It is estimated that ​shocks in the global economy accounted for about 2/3 of
weakness in the UK ​output after the financial crisis, due to the impact on trade. Following
Brexit, interest rates were lowered to improve confidence but then raised to deal with
inflation caused by the falling value of the pound. The chancellor has set aside around ​£3bn
to deal with the effects of Brexit and around £35bn will be spent in order to leave the EU​.
Changes in exchange rates can cause inflation within the country or could cause a fall in
growth and a poor balance of payments, both of which the government can attempt to solve
through various methods. ​Political instability ​in the UK or in other countries is likely to
impact the economy, and will mean the government needs to take action.




                           www.pmt.education
Transnational companies:

   ●   TNCS can bring ​huge gains to an economy through their creation of jobs, the tax
       revenue they raise, the knowledge they bring and the investment they undertake.

   ●   However, they can have a ​negative economic and social impact by destroying
       local culture, affecting the environment and withdrawing more in profits than they
       inject through investment. They also have a history of ​influencing politicians to take
       decisions that will favour their interests and are involved in tax avoidance.

   ●   In the EU and the USA, it is illegal for TNCs operating in their country to use bribery
       or corrupt practices anywhere in the world and they can be fined for doing so.

   ●   Some developing countries don’t allow TNCs to set up in their country without first
       setting up a ​joint company with a local partner​, meaning that some profits are
       retained within the country and knowledge/technology is transferred. Many
       governments use import contracts with TNCs, meaning that at least some part of
       the value of the order must be manufactured in the country.

Regulation of transfer pricing:

   ●   Transfer pricing is one way for firms to engage in ​tax avoidance​. This can occur if a
       firm produces a good in one country and then transfers it to another to make it into
       another good which it then sells.

   ●   If taxes are higher in the first country than the second country, they can set a low
       price on the product made in the first country. The overall aim is to increase their
       profit made in the low tax country and decrease it in the high tax country and so
       overall ​reduce their tax bill​.

   ●   In the UK, companies which don’t allocate sufficient profits here are ​challenged by
       HMRC and this has led to billions of pounds earnt in taxes​.

   ●   The ​Transfer Pricing Guidelines were introduced by the OECD in 1995​, providing
       guidelines on cross-border services, intangibles, cost contribution arrangements and
       advance pricing guidelines; these were modified in 2010. They aim for the price to be
       the same as if the two parties were independent of each other; the ‘arm’s length’
       principle​.

Ability to control global companies:

   ●   It is ​difficult for individual governments to control TNCs​. Small countries may
       earn less in revenue than a TNC earns in profits. Highly educated, successful
       executives are able to use a vast number of resources to find a solution which will
       benefit them.




                           www.pmt.education
  ●   The EU suffers from legal tax avoidance schemes, such as the ​‘Dutch sandwich’ and
      the ​‘double Irish’​, where costs, revenues and profits are routed through Ireland, the
      Netherlands or Luxemburg and then sent to a tax haven like the Bahamas or the
      Cayman Islands. It is suggested that for ​every £1 gained in extra taxes by
      Luxemburg, other countries are collectively losing possibly £1000 in tax revenues.

  ●   Solutions to taxation are extremely difficult as they require ​worldwide agreement.
      However, any solution which would benefit a country like the UK would lead to great
      losses for countries like the Bahamas, Ireland and Luxembourg​. There is also
      division within countries​, for example in the USA between the Democrats and
      Republicans. This division allows TNCs are able to prevent any agreement they do
      not like through immense lobbying. Any solutions are also time consuming and
      costly.



Problems facing policy makers:

  ●   Inaccurate information: ​Short term information, such as GDP figures for the
      previous month, are often inaccurate and so may mean that the government is
      unable to see if there are problems within the economy. Trying to cut down on tax
      evasion and avoidance is difficult as the government does not have the full picture on
      the level of avoidance, who it is that is avoiding the tax and the best way to reduce it.
      The Bank of England makes its decisions based on past data but it is possible trends
      in the economy may be changing so past data gives an inaccurate picture of where
      the economy is currently heading. With interest rates so low for such a long period,
      past data is unlikely to give an accurate representation of the current economic
      climate which makes it difficult for the Bank to know which action to take. Full
      cost-benefit analyses can be time consuming and costly and it is impractical for the
      government to gain every single bit of information they need.

  ●   Risks and uncertainties: The government cannot accurately predict the future
      and so it is difficult for them to know whether extra spending is necessary etc. They
      can’t know the full impact of their decisions as consumers often react unexpectedly
      and this could undermine government policy. Managing risk is an essential part of
      good decision making.

  ●   External shocks: ​The government is unable to control and prepare for these
      external shocks; the best they can hope to do is lessen their impact. Since every
      situation is different, it may be difficult to know the best method to solve the problem.
      Policies employed by policy makers may not have their intended impacts and it may
      undermine current policies in place, for example Brexit has delayed government
      plans to balance the budget.




                          www.pmt.education
