Edexcel Economics (A) A-level
 Theme 2: The UK Economy -
  Performance and Policies
           2.5 Economic Growth
                           Detailed Notes




              https://bit.ly/pmt-edu-cc
 This work by PMT                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                       Education is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND      4.0


                                                                           https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                 https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                    https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                           2.5.1 Causes of Growth

Causes of economic growth:

For economic growth to occur, there needs to be an increase in quality or quantity of one
of the four factors of production: land, labour, capital or enterprise, or these being used
more efficiently. All economists agree that an increase in LRAS will increase the potential
level of output in an economy. Any factor which increases the LRAS, will also increase
economic growth.


   ●​ Land: The discovery of new resources e.g. oil will increase economic growth.
      Economists argue that developing countries tend to grow the most from exploiting
      new resources, whilst they do not have a significant effect in developed countries.
      Saudi Arabia has experienced large growth rates almost purely because of their
      discovery of oil and without this it is likely they would still be developing.

   ●​ Labour: An increase in the quality or quantity of labour will improve economic
      growth.
         o​ Size of the workforce: Changes in the size of the workforce can come from
             immigration, demography (age profile) of the country or participation rates. A
             change in the age profile of the population i.e. the amount of people of
             working age will affect economic growth: the more people of working age
             there are, the more growth there will be. Raising the retirement age will
             increase the population of working age. The government can take action such
             as providing free childcare to encourage mothers to go back to work, which
             will increase participation rates. Immigration can be vital in enabling economic
             growth if it provides potential workers with the skills, knowledge and desire to
             work within the country. On the whole, the larger the workforce the more
             goods and services that can be produced.
         o​ Quality of the workforce: In the long run, improving the quality of labour is
             perhaps more important; this can be done through education. Improved
             education will improve labour quality as it will mean that workers have all the
             skills they need and are more efficient, so output per worker increases. More
             skilled workers will also be less likely to suffer from structural unemployment
             as they will have greater occupational mobility and so this will increase the
             output of the economy as there are less unused resources. Additionally, more
             skilled workers will be able to contribute to change i.e. new technology,
             business ideas, innovation etc. and this will help to improve economic growth.

   ●​ Capital: If a country receives sustained investment, they will be able to access or
      develop new technology which will enable the country to improve productivity. It will
      also mean more machines can be bought and used, even if these are not a
      technological advancement, so more goods can be produced. Not all investment will
      lead to increased GDP because some investment is unsuccessful whilst it is argued




                                                                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                          https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
   that other investment doesn’t increased GDP because of its nature e.g. building
   houses.

●​ Enterprise: If the government offers tax benefits and grants, they will encourage
   the development of business, creating jobs and meaning more goods and services
   are produced, which will increase economic growth. If there is too much wealth
   distribution (i.e. too high taxes and benefits), there will be little incentive to work hard
   as the rich know a lot of their money will be taken away and the poor know that there
   is no need to work as benefits will give them just as much money as a job on
   minimum wage. This lack of incentive will mean that businesses won’t invest and so
   there will be little to no economic growth.


●​ Technological progress: Improved technologies mean that the average cost of
   production is lower, whether this is because it is quicker to produce or less labour or
   equipment is needed. Also, it creates new products for the market and this helps to
   increase consumption and keeps MPC high as there are new things to buy. Without
   increased spending, there would be little economic growth.


●​ Efficiency: Efficiency is important in bringing about economic growth as it means
   less resources are needed to produce each good, so more goods can be produced.
       o​ One way the government can ensure efficiency is to keep up competition as it
           will means producers are forced to lower prices or increase quality so will
           have to improve efficiency to keep profits high.
       o​ In order for there to be efficiency, the market mechanism must be working
           properly. In some countries, particularly low and middle-income countries, the
           mechanism doesn’t work properly due to a lack of protection of property
           rights. If the government doesn’t intervene to protect property rights, then
           people will be unwilling to save and invest which will prevent economic
           growth.
       o​ Similarly, there may not be an efficient capital market (i.e. banks) so farmers
           will not have access to loans to expand their businesses.
       o​ Countries may experience civil wars or natural disasters which will lead to
           negative growth as human and physical assets are destroyed.
       o​ In a communist society, there is lack of efficiency as the government is the
           only supplier and they are not motivated to cut costs to keep profit high. When
           governments intervene too much, they can cause inefficiency through
           government failure rather than market failure.




                                                                                                  https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                         https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
Actual and potential growth:

  ●​ The actual growth is the percentage change in GDP. It is when the economy is
     actually produced more goods and services. Potential growth is the change in
     productive potential of the economy over time, so the LRAS or PPF curve shifts.
  ●​ The productive potential is determined by the factors of production and so potential
     growth means there have been resources discovered or more technology developed
     that will allow the economy to grow more. They have not yet produced the extra
     goods and services so GDP hasn’t grown. The difficulties in measuring productive
     potential means changes in GDP are used as a measure of growth.

  ●​ The PPF shows the potential output of the economy. An outward shift of the PPF
     is economic growth. If the economy moves from inside the PPF to on the PPF, this
     would be classed as economic recovery rather than economic growth. However,
     again, it is difficult to know where the PPF of an economy is and so economists tend
     to treat all increases in real GDP as economic growth.


International trade:

  ●​ Many economists argue that AD can affect economic growth, through export-led
     growth: a rise in AD through increased exports.

  ●​ This has been effective in countries such as Germany, Japan and China and
     prevents the poor balance of payments that tends to occur as a result of economic
     growth.

  ●​ Although increased exports initially increases AD rather than LRAS, sustained high
     export levels will encourage, or force, firms to invest and increase demand for
     labour, which will lead to economic growth.

  ●​ Moreover, in order to be competitive in the international market, British firms will have
     to become more efficient as they are competing with more firms than in just the UK
     market.




                                2.5.2 Output Gaps

Actual growth rates and long-term trends:
  ●​ The long run trend rate of growth is the average sustainable rate of economic
     growth over a period of time. It is what tends to happen over a long period of time;
     the average. Actual growth is the actual change (i.e. the change in real GDP) over
     time and its changes are what make up the business cycle. The difference between
     the two is an output gap.




                                                                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                          https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                 https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
Output gaps:

   ●​ An output gap is the difference between the actual level of GDP and the
      estimated long-term value for GDP- this is shown on the trade cycle diagram which
      demonstrates how the actual GDP is not always on the trend.

   ●​ A positive output gap is when GDP is higher than estimated whilst a negative
      output gap is when GDP is lower than estimated. With a negative output gap, there
      is spare capacity in the economy with factories, offices and workers not being utilised
      to produce goods and services.

   ●​ The output gap is very difficult to measure, firstly because the exact position of the
      LRAS is unknown and also because initial estimates of the real GDP are often
      inaccurate. Some economists believe they are so difficult to measure that they are
      not a valid concept to use from the purpose of economic policy. It is not possible
      to measure the productive potential of an economy as there is no single monetary
      value for the level of variables such as machinery, workers and technology.



Aggregate demand and supply:




   ●​ Output gaps can also be illustrated using AS and AD diagrams. LRAS shows the full
      capacity output i.e. where all resources are being fully utilised, and this can be
      linked to output gaps between the GDP trend line and the actual GDP.

   ●​ An equilibrium to the right of the LRAS shows the economy working over capacity in
      the short term but to the left it shows the economy working under capacity.

In the diagram, there is an equilibrium where AD=SRAS=LRAS. However, at AD3, there is a
negative output gap because the SRAS equilibrium is less than the LRAS equilibrium, so the




                                                                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                          https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                                https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
full capacity of the economy is not being met. At AD2, there is a positive output gap as
SRAS is higher than LRAS.

   ●​ Classical economists would argue that this positive output gap would be filled by
      long-run economic growth thus shifting the LRAS curve to the right, a recession
      which would decrease AD and shift the AD2 curve to the left or a rise in the costs of
      production which would decrease SRAS and shift the SRAS1 curve to the left. They
      would also argue that the negative output gap would be brought back to equilibrium
      by rising AD or a rise in SRAS due to lower costs of production.



                       2.5.3 Trade (Business) Cycle

The trade cycle:

   ●​ This is the periodic but irregular up and down movements in economic activity,
      measured by fluctuations in real GDP and other macroeconomic variables. Each
      business cycle is different, but they tend to have four main phases: boom,
      downturn, recession (slump) and recovery. There is no set definition of each
      phase and sometimes people simply refer to the cycle as a boom and recession, or
      contraction and expansion.

   ●​ There are two main types of trade cycle: a mild trade cycle where GDP does not fall
      during recessions but instead doesn’t grow by as much as the trend, and a more
      extreme one like that in the diagram.




                                                                                              https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                          https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                              https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
Characteristics of boom:

   ●​ When economy is at its peak (the boom), national income is high and the economy
      is likely to be working above PPF where there is a positive output gap.
      Consumption and investment tend to be high as are tax revenues, and wages will be
      increasing. Usually, the country will increase imports to meet the demand of
      high-income consumers that cannot be met by the goods produced within the
      country. There will also be inflationary pressure.

During a downtown, the economy begins to move from a boom to a recession, output and
income fall which leads to a fall in consumption and investment as well as tax revenues.
Payments for benefits rise as unemployment rises. People begin to accept jobs for lower
wages due to higher levels of unemployment. This causes inflationary pressure to ease and
a fall in the number of imports.



Characteristics of a recession:

   ●​ When the economy is at the bottom of the cycle, it is in a slump, trough, depression
      or recession. There tends to be high unemployment causing low consumption,
      investment and imports. Inflationary pressure will be low and there may even be
      deflation. In the UK, the government defines recession as where real GDP falls in at
      least two successive quarters.

As the economy moves out of a recession, it moves into a recovery/expansion phase as
national income and output begin to increase with unemployment falling and consumption,
investment and imports increasing. Inflationary pressure begins to grow as workers start to
demand higher wages.




                                                                                              https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                          https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                              https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                2.5.4 The impact of economic growth

Economic growth is a policy which governments aim to achieve, and so therefore it must
have benefits to consumers, firms, the government and current and future living standards.
However, there are also costs.

Consumers:

   ●​ There will be an increase in demand for housing as people have more money and so
      are able to afford to buy properties, which will increase house prices. Shares are
      likely to increase in value as businesses are making more money and future
      prospects are good. The rising prices of shares and housing will increase wealth and
      lead to positive wealth effect.
   ●​ Improved productive efficiency due to better technology could lead to lower prices
      or higher quality goods.
   ●​ Some argue that increased economic growth will lead to increased happiness, but
      this is not necessarily the case.
   ●​ On the other hand, economic growth could lead to increased inequalities and so
      may not have any effect on the average consumer and may lead to inflation, which
      has negative effects for consumers.


Firms:

   ●​ Investment will increase since businesses are more successful. They will have more
      money to invest and more incentive to invest as they will know they can make money
      from their investments.
   ●​ Business confidence will improve as there are potential demand increases for
      businesses’ products and this confidence will also lead to increased investment.
   ●​ As a result of increased investment from both businesses and governments,
      technology will improve. There will be more research and development done to
      invent more technology and more firms will be able to have the best technology,
      which is likely to increase productive efficiency and lead to lower costs.
   ●​ The combination of higher demand and lower costs is likely to lead to higher profits.
   ●​ Economic growth also provides the opportunity for new firms to establish
      themselves and allows existing ones to make more profit.




                                                                                              https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                          https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                              https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
   ●​ On the other hand, firms who sell inferior goods (with negative income elasticities)
      may lose out. Changing technologies and globalisation also mean that some firms
      find their markets disappearing e.g. DVD rental stores.


The government:

   ●​ Tax revenues will rise as more goods and services are being bought, more income is
      being earnt and more profits being made. This means the government has more
      money to put into the NHS, education, benefits etc.; the quality of these systems will
      be improved, and this will help to improve living standards.
   ●​ It can help to reduce the budget deficit, perhaps even bringing about a budget
      surplus which would allow money to be saved for future recessions.
   ●​ However, economic growth tends to mean people expect more from the
      government i.e. better education, better roads etc.


Current and future living standards:

   ●​ Economic growth will result in lower poverty levels. An increase in the production of
      goods and services will increase jobs so there will be less unemployment and less
      people on benefits. Wages are also likely to increase.
   ●​ There will be more goods and services for people to enjoy, so the poor will be
      able to get the goods and services they need instead of only the rich getting what
      they want.
   ●​ Housing standards and the quality of food increases due to economic growth.
      Health also tends to increase: not only does life expectancy rise but people have a
      higher quality of life in their old age.
   ●​ Increased government spending will lead to improved living standards both now
      and in the future, as better educated people usually have higher living standards.
   ●​ Economic growth is likely to have the highest benefits in developing countries.
   ●​ However, there could be decreased future living standards due to exploitation of the
      environment. A rise in income means more people have access to electricity etc.
      and use it more freely. This causes depletion of non-renewable resources, concern
      about sustainability of growth for future generations and increased levels of
      pollution/waste/congestion.
   ●​ On the other hand, it could be argued that people with higher incomes are able to
      buy cleaner fuels and richer countries can devote resources for research and
      development of cleaner resources and ‘greener’, more efficient technology. Also,
      higher income households tend to have less children which lowers natural rate of
      population growth, meaning less resources are needed for the future.
   ●​ Another cost may be that economic growth may result in increased inequalities
      between rich and poor. The rich may be the only ones that have gained from the
      economic growth and they may even lower the living standards of the poor by
      exploiting the poor.




                                                                                               https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                          https://bit.ly/pmt-edu                                               https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
                         https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
https://bit.ly/pmt-edu   https://bit.ly/pmt-cc
