 Edexcel Economics (A) A-level
Theme 3: Business Behaviour and
              the
         Labour Market
      3.4 Market Structures
                Detailed Notes




        www.pmt.education
                                    3.4.1 Efficiency
Efficiency can be used to judge how well the market allocates resources, and the
relationship between scarce inputs and outputs. There are a range of different types of
efficiency.

   ●   Allocative efficiency: This is achieved when resources are used to produce goods
       and services which consumers want and value most highly and social welfare is
       maximised. It will occur when the value to society from consumption is equal to the
       marginal cost of production, where​ P=MC​.

   ●   Productive efficiency: ​A firm has productive efficiency when its products are
       produced at the lowest average cost so the fewest resources are used to produce
       each product. The minimum resources are used to produce the maximum output.
       This can only exist if firms produce at the bottom of the AC curve, in the short run this
       is where ​MC=AC​. It is only possible if there is technical efficiency, where a given
       output is produced with minimum inputs- but not all technically efficient firms are
       productively efficient.

   ●   Dynamic efficiency: ​This is achieved when resources are allocated efficiently over
       time. It is concerned with investment, which brings new products and new production
       techniques. The alternative is static efficiency: efficiency at a set point in time.
       Allocative and productive efficiency are examples of static efficiency. Dynamic
       efficiency will be achieved in markets where competition encourages innovation but
       where there are differences in products and copyright/patent laws. Supernormal profit
       is required to provide firms with the incentive to invest and the ability to do so.

   ●   X-inefficiency: ​If a firm fails to minimise its average costs at a given level of output, it
       is X-inefficient and there is organisational slack. This is a specific type of productive
       inefficiency as it occurs when they fail to minimise their cost for that specific output.
       For example, the minimum point on the AC curve may be at 100 goods at a cost of
       £5 each. The firm is producing 125 goods and so is not productively efficient. It costs
       them £8 to produce each good, but they could produce 125 goods at £7. Therefore,
       they are X-inefficient since they are not producing on the lowest AC curve. It often
       occurs where there is a lack of competition so firms have little incentive to cut costs.



                            3.4.2 Perfect competition
Perfect competition is a market where there is a high degree of competition, but the word
‘perfect’ does not mean it maximises welfare or produces ideal results. There are few
industries which fit this type of market structure, one example may be ​agriculture but
government interferences may prevent it from being so. In reality, the assumptions made
rarely hold and no market is completely perfectly competitive.




                            www.pmt.education
Characteristics of perfect competition:

For a market to be perfectly competitive, there must be four key characteristics. These mean
that demand for the firm’s goods is perfectly elastic, and prices are solely determined by
interaction of demand and supply; the firms are ​price takers​.

   ●   There must be ​many buyers and sellers. ​This means that no one firm or customer
       will be able to influence the market. For example, the decision of one firm to double
       their output or the decision of one buyer to double their consumption will have no
       effect. If the firm did manage to have an effect, this would mean the market was no
       longer perfectly competitive as there would be one large firm and other smaller firms,
       or one large buyer and other smaller buyers.

   ●   There must be ​freedom of entry and exit from the industry​. This is important as it
       means that when a business is making profits anyone can enter that market and start
       producing that product for themselves. As a result, business are unable to make
       huge profits in the long run and if they are making losses they are able to leave. In
       the long run, they make normal profits.

   ●   There must be ​perfect knowledge​. This enables firms to know when other firms are
       making profits which will attract them to join the market. Moreover, all firms have the
       same costs as they can use the same production techniques. It also means that any
       attempt to raise prices above the level determined by the market will lead to no sales,
       as customers will be aware they can buy the same good for a lower price and firms
       know there is no point lowering the price as they will sell all their goods at the higher
       price determined by the market.

   ●   The product must be ​homogenous​, where they are identical so it is impossible to tell
       the difference between one make and another e.g. semi-skimmed milk. This is
       important because it means if a firm raises it price above the competitors’ no one will
       buy it and they will not gain from lowering their price because they can sell all of your
       product at the same price as everyone else.



Profit maximising equilibrium:

Firms are assumed to short run profit maximise and so the firm will produce at MC=MR. In
the short run, it is possible for the firm to make a normal profit, a supernormal profit or a loss.
However, firms in perfect competition can only make ​normal profit in the long run​. This
can be seen on the diagram.

In the short run, firms are making the supernormal profit of the shaded area. Prices are set
by the market at P1, where S1=D1. As a result, the firm faces the demand curve of
AR1=MR1 and produce where MC=MR1 at Q1 goods. However, since there is perfect
information and ease of entry, the fact they are making supernormal profits will encourage
new entrants to the market. This will increase supply from S1 to S2 and lead to a fall in price
from P1 to P2. The firm now has the demand curve AR2=MR2 and produces where
MC=MR2 at Q2. This is also where AR2=AC and so they are making normal profits. If the




                             www.pmt.education
firm was making a loss, firms would leave the industry and this would decrease supply,
pushing prices up and reverting to the long run equilibrium.




.

Efficiency:

    ●   Perfect competition is ​productively efficient​, since they produce where MC=AC.
        They are also ​allocative efficient since they produce where P=MC. Thus, they are
        static efficient​.

    ●   However, they are ​not dynamic efficient​. No single firm will have enough for
        research and development and small firms struggle to receive finance. The existence
        of perfect information also means one firms’ invention will be adopted by another firm
        and so the investment will give the firm no competitive benefit. Governments tend to
        have to do all the research.

    ●   Competition should keep costs, and therefore prices, low. However, firms will be
        unable to benefit from economies of scale and this may mean costs are higher
        than they otherwise could be.



                       3.4.3 Monopolistic competition
Monopolistic competition is a form of imperfect competition, with a downward sloping
demand curve. It lies in between the two extremes of perfect competition and monopoly,
both of which rarely exist in a pure form in real life. Some examples of firms in monopolistic
competition are ​hairdressers, estate agents and restaurants.




                            www.pmt.education
Characteristics:

   ●   There must be a ​large number of buyers and sellers in the market, each of whom
       are relatively small and act independently. This means that no one buyer or seller
       has a large price setting power.

   ●   There are ​no barriers to entry or exit​, allowing new firms to enter when
       supernormal profits are being made and some to leave in the case of losses. As a
       result, only normal profits can be made in the long run.

   ●   The difference between monopolistic competition and perfect competition is that in
       monopolistic competition firms produce ​differentiated, non-homogenous goods or
       services. This means that individual firms do have some price setting power, and so
       the curve is downward sloping.



Profit maximising equilibrium:

In the short run, firms can make supernormal profits, losses or normal profits. However, due
to the lack of barriers to entry/exit, firms can only make normal profits in the long run. This is
shown by the diagram.




Firms are assumed to be short run profit maximisers, producing at MC=MR1 in the short run.
As a result, they produce Q1 at price P1 and make a supernormal profit of the shaded area.
However, in the long run, new firms will enter the industry as they know that supernormal
profits are being earnt. This will cause demand for the individual firm to decrease and
therefore the AR and MR curves will shift to the lift. The firm will produce where MC=MR2 at
P2Q2. At this point, AC=AR2 and so the firm is making normal profits. If the firm was making




                             www.pmt.education
a loss, firms would leave the industry and thus demand for the individual firm would increase
as they had less competition. This would lead to normal profits in the long run.

The limitation of this model is that information may be imperfect and so firms will not enter
the market as predicted as they are unaware of the existence of abnormal profits. Also, firms
are likely to be different in their size and cost structure as well as in their products, which
may allow some firms to maintain supernormal profits because firms cannot compete on
equal terms.



Efficiency:

   ●   Since they can only make normal profit in the long run, AC=AR and since they profit
       maximise, MR=MC. Therefore, the firm will ​not be allocatively or productively
       efficient, ​as MR does not equal AR so AC cannot equal MC and AC cannot equal
       MR.

   ●   They are likely to be ​dynamically efficient since there are differentiated products
       and so know that innovative products will give them an edge over their competitors
       and enable them to make supernormal profits in the short run. However, since the
       firms are small they may struggle to receive finance or have the retained profits
       necessary to invest.

   ●   In monopolistic competition compared to perfect competition, ​less is sold at a
       higher price and firms may not necessarily be producing at the lowest cost.
       However, the market will offer ​greater variety and may be able to enjoy some
       degree of ​economies of scale​.




                            www.pmt.education
                                   3.4.4 Oligopoly
Characteristics of oligopoly:

Oligopoly is where there are a few firms that dominate the market and have the majority of
market share, although this does not mean there won’t be other firms in the market. There
are four key characteristics of oligopoly: products are generally differentiated; supply in the
industry must be concentrated in the hands of a relatively small number of firms, meaning
there is a high concentration ratio​; firms must be ​interdependent ​(so the actions of one
firm will directly affect another); and there are ​barriers to entry.




N-firm concentration ratios:

   ●   The concentration of supply in the industry can be indicated by the concentration
       ratio which measures the ​percentage of the total market that a particular number
       of firms have​. The 3 firm concentration ratio shows the percentage of the total




                            www.pmt.education
       market held by the three biggest firms, whilst the 4 firm ratio shows the percentage
       by the four biggest firms and so on.

   ●   It is worked out by adding the percentages of market share for the firms or using the
       formula: ​total sales of n firms​ x100
                  total size of market
       The method used will depend on the information in the question.



Collusive and non-collusive behaviour:

Collusion is when firms make ​collective agreements that reduce competition​. When firms
don’t collude, this is a competitive oligopoly. ​The UK energy market is an oligopoly that is
suspected of collusion.

   ●   If firms compete, they know lowering prices to gain new customers is likely to cause
       other firms to lower their prices;. However, if they work together, they could
       maximise industry profits​.

   ●   Collusion ​reduces the uncertainty firms face and reduces the fear of engaging in
       competitive price cutting or advertising, which will reduce industry profits.

   ●   Despite this, firms may decide to be a non-collusive oligopoly since collusion is
       illegal ​and due to the ​risks of collusion​, such as other firms breaking the cartel or
       prices being set where they don’t want it.

   ●   A firm with a ​strong business model and something that ​sets it apart from other
       firms will not want to collude if they feel they can increase market share and/or
       charge higher prices than competitors.

   ●   Collusion between firms works best when: there are a few firms which are all well
       known to each other; the firms are not secretive about costs and production methods
       and the costs and production methods are similar; they produce similar products;
       there is a dominant firm which the others are happy to follow; the market is relatively
       stable; and there are high barriers to entry.

Collusive oligopoly:

   ●   When firms engage in collusion, they may agree on prices, market share or
       advertising expenditure. There are two main types of collusion: ​overt and tacit
       collusion​. Overt collusion is when firms come to a formal agreement whilst tacit
       collusion means there is no formal agreement.

   ●   A formal collusive agreement is called a cartel, ​which is a group of firms who enter
       into agreement to mutually set prices. The rules will be laid out in a ​formal
       document which may be legally enforced and fines will be charged for firms who
       break these rules.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   There are two ways a cartel could operate: ​agree on a price for the goods and then
       compete freely using non-price competition to maximise their market share; or ​agree
       to divide up the market ​according to the present market share of each business.

   ●   The problem with any cartel is that no firm is likely to set their prices/output at the
       level they would not ideally choose and there is ​constant temptation to break the
       cartel​. The more successful the cartel, the greater the incentive to break it; it is
       important for firms to be the first to break it and not the firm who is left to deal with the
       after effects.

   ●   Since collusion is illegal, firms may be involved in tacit collusion such as price
       leadership and barometric firm.

   ●   Price leadership is where one firm has advantages due to its size or costs and
       becomes the dominant firm. Other firms will tend to follow this firm because they
       would be fearful of taking on the firm on in any form of price war. As a result, the
       dominant firm will decide the price and allow the other firms to supply as much as
       they wish at this price.

   ●   Barometric firm price leadership is where a firm develops a reputation for being
       good at predicting the next move in the industry and other firms decide to follow their
       leader.

   ●   Other examples could be unwritten rules about keeping advertising low or not trying
       to take each other’s customers.

Non-collusive oligopoly:

   ●   The behaviour of a firm under non-collusive oligopoly will depend on how it thinks
       other firms will react to its policies. ​Game theory ​can be used to examine the best
       strategy a firm can adopt for each assumption about its rivals.



Game theory:

Game theory explores the ​reactions of one player to changes in strategy by another
player. The aim is to examine the best strategy a firm can adopt for each assumption about
its rival’s behaviour and it provides insight into interdependent decision making that
occurs in competitive markets. The easiest way of demonstrating this is where ​duopoly
exists in the market, so there are two identical firms.

   ●   There are two strategies the firm could take: a maximin policy or a maximax. The
       maximin policy involves firms working out the strategy where the worst possible
       outcome is the least bad. Alternatively, the ​maximax policy involves firms working
       out the policy with the best possible outcome.




                            www.pmt.education
   ●   If the maximin and maximax strategies end up with the same solution, this is called
       the ​dominant ​strategy. However, ​dominant strategies aren’t that common in real
       life​ and the best strategy for a firm tends to depend on what the other firm does.

   ●   In some cases, there is a ​Nash Equilibrium where neither player is able to improve
       their position and has optimised their outcome based on the other players expected
       decision. They have no incentive to change behaviour, unless someone else
       changes theirs.




Game theory is used as an explanation for why firms in oligopoly tend to have ​stable prices​:
  ● In this case, there is no dominant strategy for X. The maximin strategy will be to keep
      prices unchanged, as profits will not change, whilst the maximax policy is to raise
      prices, as they could gain £5m. Most firms will want to reduce risk and so adopt the
      maximin strategy; they will keep prices unchanged.
  ● Firm Y will also choose to leave its prices unchanged if it pursues a maximin strategy:
      if they raise price they could lose £5m whilst the worst that could happen if they don’t
      change is for profits to remain the same.
  ● Therefore, both firms will leave their price unchanged and there is a Nash equilibrium
      since neither firm is able to improve their position given the position of the other
      player.

Similar matrices can be drawn to show how firms are likely to undertake large amounts of
advertising and research and development.

Prisoner’s dilemma​:




One common example of game theory is the prisoner’s dilemma. In the situation, two people
are questioned over their involvement in a crime and are kept apart so they can’t




                           www.pmt.education
communicate. The dominant strategy in this situation is to confess: it’s the greatest reward (3
months rather than a year) and the least bad (3 years rather than 10 years). However, if the
prisoners could collude or had confidence in one another, the best option would be to deny
the crime; this is the Nash equilibrium.

Types of price competition:

Prices wars:

   ●   These occur in markets where ​non-price competition is weak​; where goods have
       weak brands and consumers are price conscious. They also occur when it is ​difficult
       to collude.
   ●   A price war will drive prices down to ​levels where firms are frequently making
       losses. In the short term, firms will continue to produce if their AVC is below AR but
       in the long run, they will ​leave the market and prices will have to rise since supply
       falls.
   ●   It ​lowers industry profits​.
   ●   Supermarkets are one example of an industry using heavy price wars, with firms
       desperately trying to offer lower prices than their rivals.

Predatory pricing:

   ●   This occurs when an ​established firm is threatened by a new entrant or if one firm
       feels that another is gaining too much market share.
   ●   The established firm will set such a ​low price that other firms are unable to make a
       profit and so will be ​driven out the market. The existing firm is then able to ​put their
       price back up.
   ●   This is ​illegal and only works when one firm is large enough to be able to have low
       prices and ​sustain losses​.

Limit pricing​:

   ●   In order to prevent new entrants​, firms will set prices low (the limit price). The price
       needs to be high enough for them to make at least normal profit ​but low enough to
       discourage any other firm from entering the market.
   ●   The greater the barriers to entry, the higher the limit price. It is mainly used in
       contestable markets.
   ●   The drawback of this is that it means firms cannot make profits as high as they would
       be otherwise be able to.




                            www.pmt.education
Types of non-price competition:

An oligopolistic market tends to have a ​lot of non-price competition due to the fact that
prices are relatively stable. They spend a long time and a lot of money on ​advertising and
promotions​, for example the ​Tesco club-card or the computers for schools scheme​. ​The
soft drink market is one good example of a market with high levels of non-price competition.

   ●   Advertising: ​This creates an awareness of the company/product and can persuade
       a customer to purchase the product. If advertising is successful, it can increase sales
       and market share for a business which in the long run can increase profits.
       Advertising can also make the demand for a product/service more inelastic.

   ●   Loyalty cards: ​These encourage repeat purchases by rewarding customers for their
       loyalty. They also provide firms with lots of data on consumers’ buying habits, which
       the firm can use to increase sales.

   ●   Branding: ​A successful brand can help increase loyalty and repeat purchases for a
       business. People will trust the brand and the quality it represents so will more likely
       keep buying from them. An established brand should find it easier to release new




                           www.pmt.education
       products.

   ●   Quality: A firm that is known for good quality may be able to charge higher prices,
       and is likely to have strong brand loyalty. They are likely to have good reputation and
       benefit from positive recommendations,

   ●   Customer service: This will encourage loyalty amongst customers and give the
       business a more positive reputation.

   ●    Product development: ​A business that invests in product development will have a
        competitive advantage over rivals. If they're the first firm to release a new product,
        they would see an increase in sales and this is likely to help with branding.
The problem with these methods is that they are often ​expensive ​and so firms need the
money before they are able to undertake the competition. Similarly, only large firms will be
able to do large scale advertising, research and development etc.. There is ​no guarantee
that it will be successful.



Efficiency:

   ●   Firms will be ​statically inefficient​, since they are not productively or allocative
       efficient.

   ●   They are likely to be ​dynamically efficient. ​They make supernormal profits, so have
       the funds to invest, and they have an incentive to invest, due to competition.
       However, some may just share its profits with its shareholders or decide not to
       invest. It will depend on the market.

   ●   They will be able to exploit ​economies of scale​, lowering costs.



                                  3.4.5 Monopoly

Characteristics of monopoly:

   ●   Pure monopoly exists where one firm is the ​sole seller of a product in a market​.
       One of the closest examples to a pure monopoly is Google, who have 88% of the
       market​.

   ●   However, in the real world, pure monopoly rarely exists but a firm can be legally
       considered as having monopoly power if it has ​more than 25% of the market. The
       model assumes there is only one firm in the industry, they short run profit maximise
       and there are ​high barriers to entry. ​Tesco is a legal monopoly as it has 28% of the
       market. Some local monopolies exist, such as Stagecoach in Cambridge.




                           www.pmt.education
Profit maximising equilibrium:

The demand curve for a monopolist will be the demand curve for the product (since the
monopoly firm is the industry itself). It will be downward sloping, since even though the firm
is a monopolist, people can still choose whether to buy the good or not. Profit maximising is
at MC=MR, so this is the output they will produce at. They produce Q1 at price P1 and make
supernormal profits of the shaded area. Since there is a monopoly, the firm may be able to
earn supernormal profits or a loss in the long run as there is no freedom of entry and exit to
the market.




Third degree price discrimination:

   ●   This is when monopolists ​charge different prices to different people for the same
       good or service​. There are different examples of where this can occur: different
       times of the day, for example peak and off-peak train times; different prices in
       different places, such as between London and smaller towns; and between different
       incomes, for example discounts for elderly people.

   ●   In order for price discrimination to occur: the firm must be able to clearly ​separate
       the market into groups of buyers; the customers must have ​different elasticities of
       demand​; and they must be able to ​control supply and prevent buyers from the
       expensive market from buying in the cheaper market.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   The diagram shows the seperate markets for separate groups: those with inelastic
       demand and those with elastic demand. ​If the example was about travelling up to
       London, the workers would be the inelastic market since they have little choice other
       than to pay the increased price as they have to go to London to work, whilst
       shoppers are the elastic market since they can decide to shop elsewhere.

The diagram assumes the industry is a constant cost industry, in order to make it clearer.
The firm produces where MC=MR in each market. Therefore, in the inelastic market they
produce at Q1P1 and make supernormal profit of the orange area; in the elastic market they
produce at Q2P2 and make supernormal profit of the purple area; and in the combined
market they produce at Q3P3 and make supernormal profit of the yellow area. This shows
that by price discriminating and having two separate markets, the inelastic market and the
elastic market, rather than a combined market, the firm can make higher profits. The orange
area plus the purple area is larger than the yellow area.




Costs and benefits:

   ●   Firms benefit since they are able to increase their profits​. This can go into research
       and development, improving dynamic efficiency.
   ●   Those in the elastic market gain as they are able to pay a lower price than they
       otherwise would; they benefit from cross subsidisation. These consumers may have
       been unable to access the good if it were not for the price discrimination and so this
       may ​increase equality.​ .
   ●   Consumers lose some of their consumer surplus to the producers and some
       consumers have to pay a ​higher price.




                           www.pmt.education
Natural monopoly:

   ●   Some companies are said to be natural monopolies. In these industries, the
       economies of scale are so large that even a single producer is not able to fully
       exploit all of them​. These are decreasing cost industries. There are no pure natural
       monopolies in real life, but some examples include the ​National Grid, Royal Mail and
       National Rail.




The diagram shows a natural monopoly: AC and MC continue to fall. The firm will profit
maximise and produce where MC=MR at Q1P1, making supernormal profit of the shaded
area.

   ●   It would be ​pointless to encourage competition ​since it would raise average costs
       for the industry. If any new firm enters the market, they will be easily priced out as
       their costs will be so much higher. This raises questions for competition policy and
       nationalisation.
   ●   Natural monopolies tend to be found in industries with ​very high fixed costs​, such
       as ​railways. In order to run one train you would need to invest billions in track,
       tunnels, bridges and stations whilst running extra trains represents a much smaller
       relative increase in costs, meaning average costs will decrease drastically.

   ●   These firms are neither allocative nor productively efficient as there is no minimum on
       the AC curve and at allocative efficiency there would be a loss.




                           www.pmt.education
Costs and benefits:

Firms:

   ●   Monopolists have the potential to make ​huge profits for their shareholders through
       profit maximisation.
   ●   The existence of supernormal profits means firms will have finance for investments
       and will be able to build up ​reserves to overcome short term difficulties​.
   ●   Firms with monopoly power will be able to ​compete against large overseas
       organisations​.
   ●   Large firms will be able to maximise economies of scale, reducing costs and
       increasing profit further.
   ●   However, firms may ​not always choose to profit maximise ​because of
       X-inefficiencies, sales or revenue maximising, profit satisficing or contestability
       leading to limit pricing. In the long run, the lack of competition ​may mean that firms
       become complacent and so they may not make maximum profits.

Employees:

   ●   Monopolists produce at lower outputs, so will ​employ fewer workers​.
   ●   However, the ​inefficiency of the monopoly may mean employees receive higher
       wages, particularly directors and senior managers. Profit satisficing or sales/revenue
       maximising may mean output is higher and so more employees are employed.

Suppliers:

   ●   For suppliers, the impact of a monopolist will depend on the extent to which the
       monopolist is also a monopsonist​. If the monopolist buys all or most of the
       suppliers’ goods (so is a monopsonist), it will reduce the suppliers’ profits as the
       monopolist will decrease prices.

Consumers:

   ●   With a ​natural monopoly​, consumers tend to be better off than if there was
       competition.
   ●   When firms enjoy ​economies of scale​, they will be more efficient and customers will
       enjoy a higher consumer surplus.
   ●   Monopolists may produce an ​increased range of goods or services due to cross
       subsidisation.
   ●   The use of price discrimination will allow for ​survival of a product or service​, and
       benefits some customers (those in the cheap market) whilst is negative for others.
       For example, it is said that​ economy class flights are funded by business class flights
   ●   Consumers may pay ​higher prices and see a ​poorer quality service​, due to a lack
       of competition.
   ●   There is ​less choice​ for consumers, since there is only one firm producing the good.




                           www.pmt.education
Efficiency:

   ●   A monopoly is ​productively inefficient, ​since they don’t produce at MC=AC. They
       are also ​not allocative efficient​ as P>MC.
   ●   Since a monopolist is likely to make supernormal profits, they will be ​dynamically
       efficient.​ However, if there is no competition, they may have no incentive to invest.




   ●   The shift from perfect competition to monopoly has meant ​less production of the
       good and therefore less resources used, which causes ​deadweight loss of BCD, the
       orange area.
   ●   There is a ​fall in consumer surplus from ADP1, the total shaded area, to ABP2, the
       yellow area. P2BCP1, the purple area, has been turned into producer surplus whilst
       BCD has been lost as deadweight loss.
   ●   Monopolists may suffer from X-inefficiency because of the lack of competition.
       MC=AC may rise and this will cause an even further fall in consumer surplus.
   ●   Alternatively, a large monopolist may enjoy ​large economies of scale ​which allow
       AC to fall. If these fall by a large enough amount, then consumer surplus will grow
       larger than would exist in perfect competition.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●   Schumpeter argued that monopolies will have large retained profits and will be able
       to exploit new products or production techniques without worrying about competitors.
       This would make them ​more productively efficient​, as costs are lower, ​more
       allocative efficient, as there are new products in the market, and ​dynamically
       efficient.
   ●   Also, monopolists ​avoid undesirable duplication of services and prevent a
       misallocation of resources.
   ●   Cross subsidisation may waste resources since profits from one sector finance
       losses in another, whilst instead they should just stop production of this good.


There are ​few permanent monopolies since supernormal profits give an incentive for other
firms to break down the monopoly through a process of ​creative destruction​. Some
suggest a monopoly, or the possibility of having a monopoly, is ​good in the short run as it
provides incentive to invest and innovate which is good for both the company and the
economy. The bad aspects of monopoly are more likely to become true in the long run as
firms can simply enjoy the benefits and become complacent. The effects of a monopoly will
depend on the industry​: in industries with high fixed costs, the gains from economies of
scale will be higher.



                                 3.4.6 Monopsony


Characteristics and conditions of monopsony:

   ●   This is where there is ​only one buyer in the market, and other than this it has the
       same basic characteristics as monopoly. They can prevent new firms entering the
       market and aim to profit maximise.

   ●   In real life, pure monopsonies rarely exist but many firms experience monopsony
       power, when they buy a large percentage of the market. ​One example could be the
       NHS, who pay less for cancer drugs than a number of other high-income countries.
       Moreover, food retailers have power when purchasing supplies from farmers; farmers
       can either sell them all their goods at a low price or risk not selling them at all.

   ●   They will pay their suppliers the ​lowest price possible to minimise their costs and
       make the most of their position as the only buyer. This will enable them to maximise
       their profit. The value of the goods they buy will depend on how much money they
       can make with these goods, and this is determined by the demand curve of the
       goods they make and sell.




                           www.pmt.education
They will produce where the cost to them (MC) is equal to the value they get (AR). Hence,
they will produce where MC=D. The supply curve for the firm is the supply curve for the
market so will be upward sloping. This means the MC curve is above the supply curve, since
it costs more to pay for the last good than the average cost of all the goods (as cost rises
with output). If the market was competitive, they would produce where supply is equal to
demand, at Q2P2. However, in a monopsony, the firm will decide to produce where MC=AR
at Q1P1.



Costs and benefits:

Firms:

   ●   The monopsony gains ​higher profits by being able to buy at lower prices. This
       increases the funding for research and development and leads to more return for
       shareholders.
   ●   They achieve ​purchasing economies of scale, which will lower costs and increase
       profits.
   ●   The NHS is a monopsonist buyer of pharmaceuticals, and this leads to significantly
       lower prices. As a result, they can invest more and pay for more treatments.

Consumers:

   ●   Customers may gain from ​lower prices​ as reduced costs are passed on.
   ●   It could lead to a fall in supply, ​since the business buys fewer inputs. The extent to
       which supply to customers will fall will depend on the price elasticity of supply in the




                           www.pmt.education
       market of which the monopsonist is a buyer: if it is inelastic, there will be little fall in
       supply.
   ●   They may act as a ​counter-weight to monopolists.
   ●   There may be a ​fall in quality ​as prices are driven down.

Employees:

   ●   The supplier will sell less goods and so employ less people, whilst the monopsonist
       may employ fewer, more or the same amount of people since they have less inputs
       to use for production but their costs are also lower.
   ●   Monopsonists may pay​ higher wages​ as they are making higher profits.

Suppliers:

   ●   Suppliers will lose out as they will ​receive lower prices​; less will be supplied leading
       to some firms leaving the market.



                                3.4.7 Contestability
This model is concerned with the possibility of other firms entering the market if they see the
opportunity to make money, rather than the number of firms in the industry at a point in time.
A contestable market is one with a high threat of new entrants, which keeps firms producing
at a competitive level. Even in a monopoly, a firm may be forced to be efficient due to the
potential of new entrants to the market. Any attempt to make a huge profit will mean other
businesses will be attracted to the industry.



Characteristics of contestable markets:

   ●   Within a contestable market there is ​perfect knowledge so if one firm is making
       abnormal profits, other firms will enter the market.

   ●   There is ​freedom of entry and exit ​meaning any firms can enter/leave the market.
       There will be a ​relative absence of sunk costs. Firms will be able to and have the
       legal right to use the best available technology​, meaning their average cost curve
       will be the same as the original firms’.

   ●   There will be ​low product loyalty​, meaning people don’t consistently use one brand
       and are happy to switch if a new one enters the market.

   ●   We assume firms are short run profit maximisers and do not collude with each other.

   ●   Some examples of contestable markets are: the taxi industry, with the introduction of
       Uber; the hotel market, with AirBnB; and fast food, due to Five Guys​. Another
       example of contestability is Ocado, who are set to replace M&S in the FTSE 100
       (2018), showing the new replacing the old.




                            www.pmt.education
Implications:

   ●   In a contestable market, firms will enter the market if they see other firms are making
       huge profits. They will remain in the market until competition prevents them from
       making a profit. This will take away profit from the original firms, and could even force
       them out of business. The only way to prevent this is by using ​limit pricing​, which
       reduces the incentive for firms to enter the market.

   ●   In a perfectly contestable market, firms will only be able to make ​normal profits and
       produce where AC=AR because new firms will enter the market if price was any
       higher and they were making monopoly profits.

   ●   Firms are likely to be ​productive and allocative efficient. If they are not producing
       at the lowest point on their AC curve (i.e. not productively efficient), new firms can
       enter the market and undercut them by offering lower prices. Due to this, and the fact
       they can only make normal profits in the long run, they must also be allocative
       efficient. Since they can only make normal profits AC=AR, and since they produce at
       the lowest point on their AC curve AC=MC. Therefore, AC=MC=AR, so the value to
       society is equal to the cost.

Types of barrier to entry and exit:

Some barriers are natural barriers, sometimes called ​innocent entry barriers. ​These
include natural monopolies and high entry/sunk costs. However, others are put in place by
existing firms in the industry. They include patents and copyrights as well as high levels of
advertising and branding. Both the costs to entry and exit must be high for the market to
have low contestability, since if entry costs are high but the firm is able to make profit once in
business and not lose much of this profit if they leave, then the market is still contestable.

   ●   Legal barriers ​can prevent new firms from entering an industry. Laws are put in
       place which make it more difficult for firms to enter the market, or explicitly mean they
       cannot enter. For example, ​patents and exclusive rights to production (such as with
       television) mean other firms cannot enter the market. ​Some industries, such as the
       taxi industry, gain market licences to operate​.

   ●   Other firms can put up ​marketing barriers. High levels of advertising build up
       consumer loyalty, so demand becomes more price inelastic, and consumers are less
       likely to try other brands. Sometimes a brand can become associated with a product,
       such as ​‘Hoover’ with vacuum cleaners​. New firms entering the industry are unlikely
       to have the funds to undertake large scale advertising so struggle to compete with
       the incumbent firms. This may also be a barrier to exit, since losing a brand and
       consumer loyalty will be a cost of leaving the market.

   ●   The ​pricing decisions of incumbent firms can be a barrier to entry. Predatory
       pricing means prices are so low that firms are driven out of the market, and so it
       would be extremely difficult for new firms to enter. Limit pricing discourages the entry
       of other firms as prices are set at a level to prevent new entrants. Some firms might




                             www.pmt.education
      employ anti-competitive practices, such as refusing to supply retailers which stock
      competitors.

  ●   Some industries have high ​capital start up costs​, for example buying the machinery
      necessary to begin production. ​Sunk costs ​may also be high.

  ●   Economies of scale mean that new firms are unable to produce on the same AC
      curve as large, incumbent firms. If they were to enter the industry, their costs would
      be higher and so prices would be higher and they would be unable to compete.

  ●   Barriers to exit prevent firms from leaving a market quickly and cheaply. They include
      the ​cost to write off assets, pay leases and make workers redundant​.



Sunk costs and the degree of contestability:

  ●   A ​sunk cost is a ​fixed cost that a business cannot recover if it leaves the
      industry. It includes ​property (if the lease is longer than it is actually used for),
      machinery and equipment that cannot be resold, and advertising​.

  ●   All businesses will face sunk costs because even if things are resold it is ​generally
      for a lower price.

  ●   The degree of contestability is measured by the ​extent to which the gains from
      market entry for a firm exceed the costs of entering the market​. A market with no
      sunk costs and no barriers to entry and exit is a perfectly contestable market. The
      more contestable a market, the more unstable it will be as there can be regular hit
      and run competition.

  ●   In reality, ​no market is likely to be perfectly contestable as there is always likely to
      be some sunk cost.




                          www.pmt.education
In order to test the theory, we would need a lot of information about the cost structure of the
business. Since the theory centres on the threat of entry and not necessarily entry itself, it is
difficult to test. Even if there has not been new competition over time, this does not
necessarily mean the firm isn’t contestable. New firms entering the industry and low profits
being made suggests that an industry is contestable.




                            www.pmt.education
