 Edexcel Economics (A) A-level
Theme 3: Business Behaviour and
              the
         Labour Market
   3.6 Government Intervention
                Detailed Notes




        www.pmt.education
                       3.6.1 Government Intervention
The ​Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) ​work to promote competition for the
benefit of consumers and investigate mergers and breaches of UK and EU competition law,
enforce consumer protection law and bring criminal cases against individuals who participate
in cartels. They are able impose financial penalties, prevent mergers taking place and force
businesses to reverse actions already taken.



Controlling mergers:

   ●   In the UK, mergers are assessed in terms of the specific circumstances of each case,
       considering whether there will be a ​substantial lessening of competition ​(SLC).
       The CMA will consider the likely competitive situation if the merger goes ahead
       compared to if it does not, and the merger will be approved if its potential benefits are
       greater than its cost.

   ●   A merger is investigated if it will result in market share greater than 25% or if it meets
       the turnover test of a combined turnover of £70 million or more.

   ●   The aim of preventing two large companies merging is so they do not ​exploit their
       customers by raising price, offering poorer quality service and reducing choice. It
       can prevent firms from gaining monopoly power.

   ●   However, the problem is that ​very few mergers are investigated ​each year. The
       CMA can suffer from regulatory capture and may not have all the information
       necessary to make a decision.

Tesco’s takeover of Booker was allowed as the CMA believed the impact on competition
would not be too high since supermarkets are in a hypercompetitive industry. However, the
European Commission blocked the merger of Ryanair & Aerlingus in 2010 as they would
control more than than 80% of all Europe flights from Ireland.



Controlling monopolies:

Holding a dominant position in an industry is not wrong in itself but if the firm exploits this to
stifle competition, they are deemed to be anti-competitive. Monopolies are allocative and
productively inefficient and so it can be argued that they need to be controlled. Most of this
regulation occurs for utilities, which are natural monopoles.

Price regulation:

   ●   Regulators can set price controls to force monopolists to charge a price below profit
       maximising price, using the RPI-X formula. X represents the ​expected efficiency
       gains of the firms and the aim is to ensure firms pass on their efficiency gains to
       consumers. ​This is used in the airport industry.




                             www.pmt.education
   ●   Arguably, a better system is ​‘RPI-X+K’​, where K represents the level of ​investment​.
       This is used in the water industry and has allowed investment of £130bn.

   ●   It gives an incentive for firms to be ​as efficient as possible as if they can lower
       costs by more than X they will enjoy increased profit. It ​prevents excessive prices
       and ensures that gains are passed onto the consumer.

   ●   The problem is that it is difficult to know where to set X due to rapid improvement
       in technology and because any information on what the efficiency gains will be have
       to come from the firm, who could easily lie as there is ​asymmetric information​. As a
       result, there may be sudden price falls or rebates for customers, for example ​the
       water industry was forced to cut prices by 10% in 2000.

   ●   Moreover, ​maximum prices ​could be set where the price is equal to the MSC,
       ensuring monopolies are ​allocative efficient​. However, it is difficult for governments
       to know where they should set the price as they do not know the exact allocative
       efficient output. It can also increase dynamic inefficiency as firms are unable to
       maximise profit so may not invest.

Profit regulation:

   ●   In the ​USA, ​‘rate of return’ regulation is used where prices are set to allow coverage
       of operating costs and to earn a ‘fair’ rate of return on capital invested, based on
       typical rates of return in a competitive market.

   ●   This aims to ​encourage investment ​and prevents firms from setting high prices.
       However, it gives firms an incentive to ​employ too much capital in order to increase
       their profits.

   ●   It is also criticised since a reduction in costs will not improve the firm’s situation and
       so there is ​little incentive to be efficient​. As with ‘RPI-X’ it also means that
       regulators need sufficient knowledge of the industry and so will suffer from
       asymmetric information.

Quality standards:

   ●   Monopolists will only produce high quality goods if this is the best way to maximise
       profits. The government can introduce quality standards, which will ensure that firms
       do not exploit their customers​ by offering poor quality.

   ●   For example, the Post Office has to deliver letters on a daily basis to all areas and
       electricity generators are forced to have enough capacity to prevent blackouts.

   ●   The problem is that it requires​ political will and understanding​ to introduce.




                            www.pmt.education
Performance targets:

  ●   Regulators can introduce ​yardstick competition​, such as setting punctuality targets
      for train operating companies based on the best-performing European train
      operators. It is also possible to split up a service into regional sectors to ​compare the
      performance of one region against another​; ​this is used in the water industry​.

  ●   They could set targets over price, quality, consumer choice and costs of production. It
      will help firms to improve their service and lead to ​gains for customers.

  ●   The problem is that firms will ​resist the introduction of targets, so again it requires
      political will and understanding. They will also attempt to find ways to ​meet targets
      without actually improving​, for example changing train timetables to prevent trains
      officially arriving late.

  ●   Other firms will ​fail to meet their performance targets and so there will be no
      improvements. ​Network Rail failed to deliver on the performance targets for their long
      distance sector in 2013-14. The government need to ensure that fines and other
      deterrents are strong enough that firms at least work to ensure targets are met.




                           www.pmt.education
Promoting competition and contestability:

Promotion of small business:

   ●   The government can give training and grants to new entrepreneurs and
       encourage small businesses through ​tax incentives or subsidies​. This will increase
       competition since there will be more firms within the market, and will offer a chance
       for more firms to join.

   ●   It ​increases innovation and efficiency​, since new firms are likely to provide new
       products and incumbent firms will no longer be able to be X-inefficient.

   ●   The Red Tape Challenge aims to decrease regulation, particularly for small
       businesses. There are also schemes, such as the Enterprise Investment Schemes
       and Seed Enterprise Investment Scheme, which provide tax relief for people who buy
       shares in small companies to help them grow.

Deregulation:

   ●   This is the ​removal of legal barriers to entry to a previously protected market to
       allow private enterprises to compete. This will ​increase efficiency in the market by
       allowing greater competition as more firms can enter and conduct more activities
       than they could before. ​The Deregulation Act of 2015 aims to continue deregulation.

   ●   The government can also ​privatise industries, which will allow for competition in the
       market.

   ●   However, it can have some negative effects, leading to ​poor business behaviour​.
       Licenses for specific industries are necessary to ensure standards are upheld. Some
       have argued that the deregulation of financial markets was a major contributor to the
       financial crisis in 2008.

Competitive tendering:

   ●   The government has to provide certain goods and services because they are merit or
       public goods but this does not mean that the state has to be the producer of all these
       goods and services. Goods, such as the sheets in NHS hospitals, are ​produced by
       the private sector and then bought by the public sector.

   ●   A similar thing can be done with services; the government can ​contract out the
       provision of a good or service to private companies ​e.g. private firms could be
       employed to run hospitals. These are called ​Private Finance Initiatives (PFI)

   ●   Competition can be introduced into the market as the government will request
       competitive tenders by drawing up a specification for the good or service and inviting
       private firms to bid for the contract to deliver it. The firm offering the lowest price wins
       the contract, subject to quality guarantees.




                            www.pmt.education
   ●   This helps to ​minimise costs for the government and ensures efficiency by
       allowing for competition in the market. The private sector will have ​more experience
       running the projects, so it is likely they will be better managed.

   ●   However, it may not always be the most cost effective way and the process of
       collecting bids is ​costly and time-consuming​. The private sector may not aim to
       maximise social welfare in the same way the government would and could use
       cost-cutting methods that ​reduce quality​.

It is important that they prevent firms undertaking ​anti-competitive practices​, such as
collusion and predatory pricing. ​The Enterprise Act (2002) means firms engaging in these
practices can be fined up to 10% of worldwide annual sales and those who organise cartels
can face up to five years in prison and unlimited fines. ​In 2011, the 9 supermarkets in the UK
were found to be fixing the price of milk and cheese products and Tesco alone was fined for
£10 million. The problem is that it is very difficult to prove overt collusion and almost
impossible to prove tacit collusion.



Protecting suppliers and employees:

Restrictions on monopsony power:

   ●   Monopsonists are able to exploit suppliers by reducing prices. The government can
       prevent these by passing ​anti-monopsony laws ​which make certain practices illegal
       and can introduce an ​independent regulator ​who will force monopsonists to buy
       fairly.

   ●   Fines ​can be put in place for those who exploit their power and ​minimum prices
       may be introduced to ensure suppliers are paid a fair amount. ​Self-regulation can
       also be used, but this is weak.

Workers’ rights:

   ●   The government protects employees through ​health and safety laws, employment
       contracts, redundancy processes, maximum hours at work and the right to be
       in a trade union. The government can also encourage firms to draw up ​codes of
       conduct​ relating to employment practice.

   ●   The problem is that if workers’ rights are too strong, employers will be ​unwilling to
       take on new workers​ due to the extra cost of employing these workers.



Privatisation and nationalisation:

   ●   Privatisation is the sale of government equity in nationalised industries or other firms
       to private investors. ​The aim is to revitalise inefficient industries but can sometimes
       lead to higher prices and poor services.




                            www.pmt.education
   ●   Nationalisation is when a private sector company or industry is brought under state
       control, to be owned and managed by the government.

Advantages and disadvantages of privatisation:

   ●   It encourages ​greater competition​, which reduces X-inefficiency and ensures low
       prices and high quality as firms realise they need to be competitive.
   ●   Managers become more accountable​, since they know poor performance will mean
       a fall in share prices and/or shareholders wanting them to be replaced.
   ●   In both the long and short run, it can ​reduce the public sector net cash
       requirement (PSNCR) as the initial sale of shares raises revenue for the government
       and they no longer have to cover any of the firm’s losses.
   ●   It ​reduces government interference which some see as a benefit in itself. This also
       means that firms can ​invest with greater certainty​, instead of worrying about
       change when a government is elected every 5 years.
   ●   An ideological argument is that it puts ​utilities into the hands of the people​, since
       they can own shares. Workers will be more motivated as they know their hard-work
       will be rewarded by high dividends.
   ●   On the other hand, when there are natural monopolies it may be fairer for the
       government to own the firm since they won’t ​abuse their monopoly position​.
   ●   Some people argue that ​industries such as electricity, water and transport are
       important ​because they directly affect the success of other industries, and so
       therefore it makes more sense for the government to own them in order to coordinate
       them properly.
   ●   There are problems over ​externalities and inequality.
   ●   Some argue that it ​negatively affects that the PSNCR as firms are under-priced
       when they are sold and the government no long receives a firm’s profit.

Between 1994 and 1997, the railway industry was privatised. This has seen a rise in
passenger satisfaction and a growth in investment. Season tickets have risen with inflation
but standard single fairs have risen by 200%.

Advantages and disadvantages of nationalisation:

   ●   Investment is needed for the long term​, but in a private company investment is
       only short term as shareholders will see no benefit from long term investment. This
       may lead to a poor quality of service.
   ●   In the case of a ​natural monopoly​, it is better for monopoly to be run by the state as
       they aim to maximise social welfare rather than a private business who will maximise
       profits.
   ●   The government will ​consider externalities​.
   ●   The government will guarantee a ​minimum level of service for people who suffer
       the risk of being cut off from the service, due to the lack of potential profit from
       providing for them.
   ●   Some say it would be dangerous to allow key strategic industries to fall into private
       hands as this could have disastrous effects for the country.




                           www.pmt.education
   ●    However, nationalised industries suffer from the ​principal-agent problem and
        moral hazard, as managers know that any loss they make will be covered by the
        government.
    ● They will experience ​X-inefficiency and this could cause higher prices for
        consumers, especially since the industry will become a monopoly.
    ● They will be ​influenced by government’s decisions and the government may not
        have enough money to invest.
Post WWII brought high levels of nationalisation and this is known as the ‘golden age, a
period of high growth before a period of stagflation that led to privatisation of these same
industries. It became apparent that they suffered from high losses and were X-inefficient.

The NHS is a nationalised industry which suffers from a lack of funding and a lack of
competition, both of which lead to poor quality. They also suffer from uncertainty as
spending on the NHS changes every five years with the new government; this causes
problems and is something Jeremy Hunt has tried to change.

Natural monopolies:

Natural monopolies bring about the question of nationalisation. It is argued that if the
industry is likely to end up as a monopoly it is better for the consumer if that monopoly is
controlled by the government, who will maximise welfare. If the firm is private and decides to
profit maximise, it will produce where MC=MR and therefore produce at P1Q1 and make
supernormal profit of the orange area. However, if it was nationalised the firm would instead
aim to maximise welfare and so would produce where AR=MC, the allocative efficient output.
This would mean they produce at Q2P2 and would make a loss of the purple area. The
nationalisation leads to higher output at lower prices but causes a loss for the industry, which
the government would need to cover.




                            www.pmt.education
           3.6.2 The impact of government intervention

Impacts:

   ●   Governments are able to ​prevent monopolies charging excessive prices ​and aim
       to ​limit their profit. They try to ensure that ​consumers pay fair prices, receive a
       good quality service and have a lot of choice through different methods of
       regulation and target setting. High regulation may force some firms out of the
       industry, which would reduce choice.

   ●   They can increase ​efficiency in a market by increasing competition and
       contestability. By regulating prices, they ensure a business keeps their costs low and
       so prevent X-inefficiency. They try to increase ​dynamic efficiency by encouraging
       investment. However, if the government regulates too strongly, they can ​push costs
       up​ and led to inefficiency.

   ●   If the government runs a business, in theory, they should ​reduce prices and
       increase quality ​as they aim to benefit consumers. A public sector business is likely
       to be ​allocative efficient, as they aim to maximise social welfare. They will see lower
       costs due to ​economies of scale​. However, the government may suffer from
       X-inefficiency as they have no incentive to be efficient due to the lack of
       competition. This may push up prices and reduce the quality of a good; the private
       sector may have expertise and knowledge which the government might not have.
       The government are likely to offer ​less choice, since there is only one company
       producing the good.

   ●   Government intervention on the whole tends to be limited because of the political
       power of large firms and industries as a whole. They are able to lobby the
       government and set up pressure groups.



Limits:

Regulatory capture:

   ●   This occurs when the regulator is captured by the firm/industry they are regulating.
       The fact that the regulator will often meet with the firm’s employees will mean they
       become ​more empathetic and able to ‘​see things from their perspective’​, which
       will remove impartiality and weakens their ability to regulate.

   ●   Large corporations can ​invest huge amounts in learning how to play the system and
       in gaining the support of their regulator. It also is likely that the regulator will have
       worked in the sector for many years, as these people will have experience and
       knowledge of the industry. As a result, they will have ​personal connections with
       those that they are regulating and this makes it difficult for them to be unbiased.




                           www.pmt.education
  ●   This is an example of ​government failure​, and argues that government regulation is
      not the most effective method of achieving competition and efficiency.

  ●   One example is the alleged capture of HMRC by Vodafone, who negotiated a tax
      reduction from £7bn to £1bn in 2009-10​.

Asymmetric information:

  ●   This is where regulatory bodies have to ​use information provided to them by the
      industries ​when setting price targets etc. It is in the industry’s best interest to
      maximise their profits and so may provide inaccurate or limited information, meaning
      regulators are unable to set correct targets, prices etc.

  ●   As a result, ​government failure may occur if regulation such as RPI-X or quality
      standards are not set correctly. The government will be unable to regulate the
      companies accurately.




                         www.pmt.education
